1491407397	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/05/politics/steve-bannon-white-house-national-security-council/index.html	Steve Bannon bumped from National Security Council - CNNPolitics.com	(CNN)Steve Bannon, President Donald Trump's chief strategist, has been removed from the National Security Council, according to a senior administration official. An official says Bannon was only on board to oversee now-ousted National Security Adviser Michael Flynn's work to "deoperationalize" the National Security Council from the broad purview it had under Susan Rice. It was an nontraditional role for a political hand like Bannon to have a role on the high-level policy council. The White House has sought to give back a lot of control to the Defense Department and other national security agencies.  
1491407138	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/05/politics/un-security-council-resolution-syria/index.html	UN Security Council eyes condemnation of Assad regime for Syria attack - CNNPolitics.com	Washington (CNN)Members of the United Nations Security Council may vote Wednesday on a resolution condemning the Syrian government for the chemical weapons attack on civilians. Representatives from the United States, United Kingdom and France have ‎circulated a draft resolution demanding that the Syrian government provide flight logs from Tuesday, the day of the attack, which killed dozens, including many children. The draft also calls for meetings with Syrian generals or other officers. The resolution -- facing a likely veto from Russia, which backs the regime of Syrian President Bashar al-Assad -- explicitly condemns the use of chemical weapons within Syria and states that their use represents a threat to international peace and security. An emergency Security Council meeting was called at UN headquarters in response to the suspected targeted attack. The Syrian military under Assad has denied responsibility for the attack, claiming it would never use chemical weapons. Multiple countries denounced the attack on Wednesday before and during the Security Council hearing. Bahram Qasemi, a spokesperson for Iran's Foreign Ministry, said the country "strongly condemns" the use of chemical weapons in Syria "regardless of the perpetrators and the victims." France's UN ambassador, François Delattre, said of the attack: "That reminds us of the day of the regime's attack on Damascus. This chemical horror opens a new spiral into the abyss of the human tragedy." But Russian Foreign Ministry spokeswoman Maria Zakharova blasted the resolution, telling reporters Wednesday it was "unacceptable" and that it was drafted too quickly. The UK and Chinese ambassadors also exchanged sharp words over responsibility for UN inaction. UK Ambassador Matthew Rycroft condemned prior vetoes by China and Russia, which blocked international action on Syria. But China's Ambassador Liu Jieyi, in a rare diplomatic outburst, said the UK delegate should stop "abusing" the Security Council. CNN's Bijan Hosseini and Radina Gigova contributed to this report. 
1491407040	http://money.cnn.com/2017/04/05/technology/germany-hate-speech/index.html	Facebook, Twitter face fines up to $53 million over hate speech - Apr. 5, 2017	Fake news sites designed to trick you Facebook, Twitter and other social media companies will be fined as much as €50 million ($53 million) in Germany if they fail to remove hate speech and fake news posts quickly. The German cabinet approved a plan to start imposing the fines on Wednesday. The draft bill will still have to be considered by the German parliament and other bodies before it becomes a law. "The providers of social networks are responsible when their platforms are misused to propagate hate crimes and fake news," justice minister Heiko Maas said in a statement emailed to CNNMoney. He said that the companies must organize their complaints management in a way that allows obviously criminal content to be deleted promptly. The companies will have 24 hours to remove hate speech and fake news posts that breach German law after they are flagged by users. Other illegal content needs to be deleted within 7 days of reporting. Social networks are already required to remove illegal content from their websites as soon as they are aware of it, according to German law. The new fines, Maas said, are there to make sure they comply with the law. Related: Google under fire for posting government ads on hate videos Facebook (FB, Tech30), Twitter (TWTR, Tech30), Microsoft (MSFT, Tech30) and YouTube made a big public promise last May to review a majority of content flagged by users within 24 hours. Any racist, violent or illegal posts would be deleted, they said. However, German officials said the companies are failing to meet the target. "Our problem is that too few [pieces of] criminal content are deleted by the social networks," Maas said. He pointed to a research by Jugendschutz, a German body for the protection of minors on the Internet, which said Facebook only deletes 39% of reported criminal content. Facebook said it works "very hard to remove illegal content" from its platform and is determined to work with others to solve the problem. "As experts have pointed out, this legislation would force private companies rather than the courts to become the judges of what is illegal in Germany," it said in a statement. Twitter was not immediately available to comment on the announcement. The government holds majority in the parliament and the bill is expected to move through the legislative process swiftly. Maas said the government wants the bill to become law before the general election in September. Free speech activists and tech companies have in the past criticized the plan, saying it could damage free speech. Maas said freedom of expression has a "huge meaning" in German democracy. "Even repulsive and ugly utterances -- even lies can be covered by freedom of expression," he said. "However: freedom of expression ends where criminal law begins...anyone who spreads criminal content on the Internet must be consistently prosecuted and brought to justice," he added. CNNMoney (London) First published April 5, 2017: 11:44 AM ET
1491406865	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/05/middleeast/syria-airstrike-idlib-how-it-unfolded/index.html	From airstrike to aftermath: How Syria attack unfolded - CNN.com	Editor's Note: This article contains extremely graphic images of dead children. All times are local. Nightmarish accounts continue to filter out of Khan Sheikhoun, the northern Syrian town still reeling from what is feared to be the deadliest chemical attack in the country in years. Investigations are underway to determine who was responsible for the Tuesday morning attack that left at least 70 dead, according to activists. This is how it unfolded, based on eyewitness accounts provided to CNN. 6:30 a.m.: Airstrike hits town center, chemical agent suspected An airstrike hit the town center of Khan Sheikhoun, emitting a "poisonous gas," Anas al-Diab, an activist with the Aleppo Media Center (AMC) says. Casualties are reported to have died from asphyxiation caused by exposure to an unknown gas or chemical agent. The injured are initially treated at a makeshift clinic near the scene and Al-Rahma hospital, among others. Three more strikes reported Five minutes later, three additional strikes reportedly hit the town center, al-Diab says. This time there are no descriptions of gas. At this point it is unclear if the planes involved are Syrian, but the rebel-held city is regularly targeted from the air by the Syrian military and its ally, Russia. Russia later denies having warplanes in the vicinity. Casualties arrive at hospital Warning: This section contains extremely graphic images of dead children. Fares al-Jundi, a doctor who lives in a nearby village, hurries to the Maarat al-Numan hospital immediately after the airstrikes. "I've never seen anything like it, beyond description," he tells CNN as he describes the horrifying scenes. Al-Jundi estimates up to 500 people have been brought in; the wounded cover entire floors, from the patients' rooms and operating theaters and any remaining space in the corridors. "I believe this horrible memory will stay with me for the rest of my life," he continues. Chaos on the ground Hadi al Abdullah, an activist journalist, arrives on scene two hours after the initial attack. Abdullah, who is suffering from blurred vision, a splitting headache and lethargy -- common side-effects of exposure to nerve gas -- says the scene is chaotic. He tells CNN that that people were not initially aware of the presence of a toxic agent. Some who rushed to help are overwhelmed by the gas, including several members of the Syrian Civil Defense (SCD), or White Helmets, who have to be rescued by others from the group. Abdullah says around 30 wounded people have gone to Turkey for treatment. Hospitals targeted in follow-up airstrikes, activists say The makeshift clinic and Al-Rahma hospital, where the injured are being triaged, are targeted in new airstrikes four hours after the chemical attack, Idlib's health directorate and the SCD say in a joint press release. Videos emerge on social media Videos, which appear to be from the scene, are posted quickly to social media platforms. Mohammed Hardan, who works for AMC, says he was at al-Rahma hospital when it was targeted by aerial bombardment, posting footage of the incident hours later. White Helmets: Residents targeted by poison gas Warning: This section contains graphic images of dead children. The White Helmets say at least 50 people, including women and children, have been killed by "poisonous gases." 70 dead, activists say AMC activists say the Syrian regime is behind the attack and says at least 70 people are dead. It adds that 45 bodies have been identified so far. Syrian army denies chemical attack On Monday evening, Syrian President Bashar al-Assad's military "categorically denies" using chemical weapons and blames "terrorist" groups for the carnage. Many in the international community blame the Assad regime for the outrage, and the World Health Organization said victims bore the signs of exposure to nerve agents. CNN's Kareem Khadder, Schams Elwazer, Elizabeth Roberts, Eyad Kourdi,Tamara Qiblawi, Angela Dewan, Eliza Mackintosh and Euan McKirdy contributed to this report. 
1491406752	http://money.cnn.com/2017/04/05/media/ad-boycott-bill-oreilly-oreilly-factor/index.html	Why Bill O'Reilly and Fox News might be able to weather advertiser storm - Apr. 5, 2017	O'Reilly accuser: I'm not after money The rush of advertisers fleeing Fox News' "The O'Reilly Factor" and its host Bill O'Reilly surely isn't welcome news for the network. Setting the public-relations concerns and optics aside, though, if history is any guide Fox and O'Reilly are positioned to weather such defections if they so choose. Nobody likes taking the financial haircut that prolonged and committed advertiser boycotts can inflict. But while some personalities have lost shows or changed networks amid such pressure, O'Reilly resides on an elevated tier with the likes of Rush Limbaugh, who, like the Fox host, has endured multiple controversies over the years and ultimately prevailed not too much worse for the wear. The withdrawal of ads from O'Reilly's program follows a New York Times report detailing a total of $13 million paid out in settlements to five women related to accusations of sexual harassment or verbal abuse against the Fox host. It also follows the ouster of Fox News CEO Roger Ailes -- who had been O'Reilly's staunchest defender over the years -- after a series of sexual harassment allegations against him. (Both O'Reilly and Ailes have denied the allegations against them.) Historically, advertisers are quick to pull ads or reallocate money when programs are faced with the taint of scandal. But it's not uncommon for them to quietly return to those same programs once the public pressure subsides. Related: 20 companies pull ads from 'The O'Reilly Factor' in growing backlash Besides, for Fox News, the benefits that flow from "The O'Reilly Factor" -- its highest-rated program, and the linchpin of its primetime lineup -- go beyond advertising. The show's vast audience feeds directly into the program that follow hosted by Tucker Carlson and Sean Hannity, helping buoy their numbers. And as a basic cable network, Fox also receives a dual revenue stream. Well over half of its annual income stems from fees that cable and satellite operators pay to carry the channel. Writing in the Hollywood Reporter, news analyst Andrew Tyndall cited O'Reilly's sizable audience as the true source of his value -- making carriage of Fox News "indispensable, thereby allowing the channel to charge cable operators top dollar, which is the true source of its fabulous profitability." Earnings from advertising are also significant, but in the short term Fox's sales operation can rely on companies that are less sensitive to public pressure than big national brands -- what are sometimes known derisively as "bottom-feeder" advertisers, from gold companies to direct-response marketers, urging viewers to call toll-free numbers. A preponderance of such sponsors ran spots during the show on Tuesday night. Those advertisers generally pay less than blue-chip sponsors. Still, they will offset some of the losses, while securing O'Reilly's show, which has become perhaps even more fundamental to Fox News' short-term foundation with the departure of another primetime star, Megyn Kelly, Finally, the cable-news audience in general -- and Fox in particular -- skews much older than the young-adult demographics sought by media buyers. While advertisers generally negotiate TV news deals based on the adults 25-54 age bracket, Fox's median viewer age is 68 (the oldest among the cable-news networks), which blunts ad revenues relative to its total audience. Advertiser boycotts have produced some notable victories, in some instances resulting in unrenewed contracts or talent opting to migrate to premium platforms, where advertising isn't an issue. Bill Maher, for example, lost his ABC show "Politically Incorrect" in 2002 after remarks related to the Sept. 11 attacks. He subsequently landed at HBO, where he remains. Similarly, Dr. Laura Schlessinger -- criticized for her positions regarding gays and lesbians, as well as for using the "N" word on air multiple times during a conversation with an African-American caller -- didn't renew her terrestrial radio contract and shifted to satellite service Sirius XM in 2011. Related: Rush Limbaugh renews contract Even Limbaugh's empire appeared to be threathened after he called law student Sandra Fluke "a slut" in 2012. The radio host lost advertisers, and his syndicated program was chased off some key affiliates in major cities. Still, despite the blow to his business model Limbaugh and distributor iHeartMedia announced a four-year contract extension in August, though almost surely for less money as he might once have commanded. Fox has thus far expressed support for O'Reilly, and the fact that the network chose to renew his deal despite knowing about the settlements would seem to indicate a desire to have him continue and eventually leave on his and Fox's own terms. (In an interview with Adweek last July, O'Reilly hinted at retirement as an option, saying, "I don't want to work this hard much longer. I know that.") The larger question, perhaps, is what impact a prolonged pressure campaign will have on O'Reilly himself. In the past, the host has proved sensitive to criticism, from accusations he exaggerated his war-reporting experience to initial coverage of Andrea Mackris' sexual-harassment lawsuit against him in 2004. O'Reilly enjoyed unwavering backing from Ailes through past controversies. In removing Ailes, 21st Century Fox has appeared more responsive to public perceptions under the stewardship of mogul Rupert Murdoch's heirs, James and Lachlan Murdoch. Still, both Rupert Murdoch (who is now overseeing Fox News) and his sons still look reluctant to lose the advantages that come with employing the highest-rated host on cable news. But that could change if more allegations -- and a truly sustained loss of advertisers -- follow. CNNMoney (Los Angeles) First published April 5, 2017: 11:39 AM ET
1491406528	http://money.cnn.com/2017/04/05/technology/pierre-omidyar-donation-fake-news/index.html	Ebay founder Pierre Omidyar commits $100 million to combating 'fake news' - Apr. 5, 2017	Why PolitiFact is helping Facebook flag "fake news" stories and hoaxes Pierre Omidyar, the billionaire founder of eBay, wants to support investigative journalism and fight "fake news." His philanthropic investment firm, Omidyar Network, announced Tuesday a $100 million commitment to address some of the causes of what the firm describes as the "global trust deficit." Recent events like Brexit, the impeachment of Brazil's President Rousseff and the U.S. presidential election have eroded the public's trust in institutions, experts and the media, Omidyar Network said. The funding will be doled out over the next three years to outlets across the globe. The initiative is focused on "strengthening independent media and investigative journalism, tackling misinformation and hate speech and enabling citizens to better engage with government on critical issues," the group said. Related: Facebook, Google to help fight fake news ahead of French elections One of the first media outlets to receive funding will be the International Consortium of Investigative Journalists (ICIJ), the group that uncovered the "Panama Papers" that alleged top officials around the globe hid wealth by using secret offshore companies. ICIJ will receive a three-year grant of up to $4.5 million to expand its investigative reporting. Other groups that will receive Omidyar Network funding include the Anti-Defamation League and Alianza Latinoamericana para la Tecnología Cívica (ALTEC), a project to promote civic technology platforms, accountability and transparency in Latin America. Further investments and grants will be announced in the coming weeks, the firm said. Related: Russia accuses Western media of spreading 'fake news' Tech companies such as Apple (AAPL, Tech30), Facebook (FB, Tech30) and Google (GOOG) have spoken out about the fake news issue in recent months. In February, Apple CEO Tim Cook said the fake news plague is "a big problem in a lot of the world" and called for a massive campaign against it. Facebook late last year said it would start applying warning labels to some fake news stories shared on its site. The social media giant has also partnered with Google to help stop fake news stories from spreading ahead of France's elections. CNNMoney (New York) First published April 5, 2017: 11:28 AM ET
1491406515	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/05/politics/rand-paul-donald-trump-russia/index.html	How Rand Paul suddenly became Donald Trump's best buddy - CNNPolitics.com	(CNN)Rand Paul once called Donald Trump a "delusional narcissist" and an "orange-faced windbag." Which makes the fact that the Kentucky senator has emerged as the chief defender of the President's unproven claims of being wire-tapped by the Obama Administration all the more amazing. "This was a witch hunt that began with the Obama administration, sour grapes on the way out the door," Paul said Tuesday of the reported requested unmasking of Trump campaign officials by former national security adviser Susan Rice. "They were going to use the intelligence apparatus to attack Trump, and I think they did." (Paul took it even further, arguing that Rice should be subpoenaed to force her to tell Congress what she knows about the unmasking efforts.) Rice denies the allegation. The Trump-Paul alliance is, like most things in Washington, a marriage of political convenience. Paul has long been an outspoken opponent of the breadth and reach of the so-called security state, insisting that things like the Foreign Intelligence Services Court and the broad-scale listening programs exposed by Edward Snowden run directly counter to American civil liberties. He clearly sees a chance in this Trump-Russia controversy -- all of which stems from a tweet by the President alleging he had been wiretapped by President Barack Obama -- to score political points on the idea that the government is listening to everyone all the time and that it is a very bad thing indeed. And, remember that the controversial Section 702 of the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act, which allows for the bulk collection of data from Internet service providers, is set to sunset at the end of the year -- and Paul believes that it's possible he can win the fight against re-authorization. For Trump, he is happy for any defense he can get for his allegation in search of evidence. His claim of being wiretapped has been totally debunked by, among others, FBI Director James Comey, former Director of National Intelligence James Clapper and even House intelligence committee Chair Devin Nunes. At this point, Trump's best (only?) way out is to muddy the water enough regarding wiretapping that he can clam he was right and move on. Paul is very much helping him do that, conflating Trump's wire-tapping claims with the broader idea of a surveillance state. It's worth noting here that Paul's conflations aren't, well, accurate. We know from Clapper that no FISA order for the wire-tapping of Trump Tower exists; "I can deny it," Clapper told NBC's Chuck Todd when asked directly about the existence of a FISA order. But, for Paul and Trump that's besides the point. Their mutual interests intersect in creating the idea of an all-knowing, always-listening intelligence community who is using the information they gather for their own political penchants. So, Paul and Trump are friends. For now.  
1491406473	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/05/middleeast/idlib-syria-attack/index.html	Syria chemical attack victims gassed as they slept - CNN.com	This story contains graphic imagery. (CNN)Russian claims that a regime airstrike on a "terrorist" ammunition depot caused the deaths of at least 70 people in northern Syria have been rejected, as victims described the aftermath of chemical bombs dropped from planes. International condemnation mounted on Wednesday over what appeared to be a targeted chemical attack on a rebel-held town in Idlib province, one of the deadliest since the Syrian war began six years ago. The White House and the UK blamed the regime of President Bashar al-Assad for the outrage, which caused the deaths of at least 10 children, some asleep in their beds when the attack struck at dawn. The World Health Organization said victims bore the signs of exposure to nerve agents, and Amnesty International said evidence pointed to an "air-launched chemical attack." International agencies were working to establish the provenance of the agents used in the strike. Russia claimed the deaths were caused by gas released when a regime airstrike hit a chemical weapons factory on the ground. But victims being treated in a hospital on the Turkish side of the border told a CNN team they saw chemical bombs being dropped from planes. Key developments Dozens of victims have been taken to Turkey for treatment. The attack coincided with a two-day meeting in Brussels on Syria's future. UK Foreign Secretary Boris Johnson calls attack a 'barbaric act.' Medical experts and US say attack likely result of a nerve agent, like sarin gas. UN will hold a Security Council emergency meeting later Wednesday. The Russian defense ministry claimed on its Facebook page that a Syrian airstrike hit "workshops, which produced chemical warfare munitions" in the eastern outskirts of Khan Sheikhoun. It said that "terrorists" had been transporting the chemical munitions from its largest arsenal to Iraq. But a chemical weapons expert, Col. Hamish de Bretton-Gordon, told BBC Radio 4 that all signs showed the chemical used was sarin gas and that Russia's versions of events was "completely unsustainable." "I think this is pretty fanciful and no doubt the Russians trying to protect their allies. Axiomatically, if you blow up sarin, you destroy it," he said. Hours after the attack, several people were injured when an airstrike hit near a hospital in the same town, where victims from the earlier attack were being treated, the Aleppo Media Center activist group reported. The Syrian Civil Defense rescue group, known as the White Helmets, said the hospital was knocked out of service. Victim: 'I don't know if my family is dead or alive' Around 25 victims of the attack were being treated Wednesday at the Reyhanli Hospital in southern Turkey near the Syrian border. Several said that they saw a plane drop chemical bombs. Mazin Yusif, a 13-year-old-boy, broke down in tears as he spoke of what happened. "At six thirty in the morning, the plane struck. I ran up on our roof and saw that the strike was in front of my grandfather's house," he told CNN at the hospital. He said he ran toward the house and found his grandfather slumped over. He ran outside to call for help. "I got dizzy and then fainted in front of my grandfather's garage. I next found myself here in this hospital, naked in a bed." The boy's grandmother, 55-year-old Aisha al-Tilawi, said she saw blue and yellow after the plane dropped the chemical-laden bomb. "We started choking, felt dizzy, then fainted. Mazin was trying to wake up his grandfather. Three of my family died," she said, lying in bed with an oxygen mask on her face. Another victim, 31-year-old Ahmed Abdel Rahim, stared vacantly from his hospital bed as he explained he was hit with a poisonous substance carried by three rockets. "I was in my house. I had difficulty breathing, but I feel better now. But I did throw up after getting to the hospital. I don't know if my family is dead or alive. I don't know anything," he said. Worldwide condemnation The World Health Organization said some victims showed symptoms consistent with exposure to a category of chemicals that includes nerve agents. That conclusion was supported by Amnesty International, which said victims were "very likely" to have been exposed to a compound such as sarin. The Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons said it was gathering evidence about the attack. CNN saw a mobile laboratory provided by Turkish authorities at the Syrian border. Speaking at a high-level meeting in Brussels on the future of Syria, the UK's Johnson pointed the finger firmly at the Syrian regime. "All the evidence I have seen suggests that it was the Assad regime who did it, in full knowledge they were using illegal weapons in a barbaric attack on their own people," Johnson said. Assad's military has repeatedly denied using chemical weapons and consistently blames "terrorist" groups when chemical attacks are reported. But many of these are delivered through airstrikes, and no rebel or terrorist group in Syria is believed to have the capacity to carry out aerial bombardments. A UN investigation in August last year found that chemical weapons had been used in Syria, both by the national air force and ISIS militants. It found two instances where regime forces had used chlorine as a chemical weapon, and one where ISIS had used mustard gas between 2014 and 2015. UN emergency meeting At the meeting in Brussels, the United States, Britain and France circulated a resolution to be presented at an emergency session at the United Nations Security Council later Wednesday. The short resolution condemns the attack, calls for those responsible to be held accountable and reminds Syria of its obligations to refrain from using chemical weapons. If the resolution goes to a vote, it is likely to be blocked by Russia, which has used its veto power as a permanent member of the Security Council at least seven times on Syrian resolutions. Delegates at the conference in Brussels, including UN Secretary General António Guterres, said there was an urgent need to find a political solution in Syria. "The images we have seen yesterday from Syria remind us all that here we have a responsibility to unite for real with a serious engagement the international community, the regional players, but also the Syrian parties to make peace," said EU foreign policy chief Federica Mogherini. But US Ambassador to the UN Nikki Haley has previously said that Assad's ouster was not a priority for President Donald Trump's administration. "Do we think he's a hindrance? Yes. Are we going to sit there and focus on getting him out? No," she said last week. The Syrian Coalition, an umbrella opposition group, compared the suspected chemical attack with one in Eastern Ghouta in 2013 "that the international community allowed to pass without accountability or punishment." A UN report found that the nerve agent sarin gas had been used to kill civilians in that attack, in which activists say around 1,400 people were killed. CNN's Ben Wedeman, Tamara Qiblawi, Eyad Kourdi, Lindsay Isaac, Onur Cakir and Milena Veselinovic contributed to this report. 
1491406319	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/05/politics/trump-isis-message/index.html	ISIS message calls Trump 'foolish idiot' - CNNPolitics.com	(CNN)Islamist terror group ISIS has unleashed contempt on both the United States and President Donald Trump in a new audio message, calling the latter a "foolish idiot." ISIS spokesman Abu Hasan al-Muhajir narrates the roughly 37-minute message, which was released Tuesday. "You (America) are bankrupt and the signs of your demise are evident to every eye," Muhajir says. "There is no clearer sign of you being ruled by a foolish idiot who does not know what Levant or Iraq or Islam is, who continue(s) his hallucination to express his animosity and war against it (Islam)." The message was distributed via social media by ISIS supporters. It isn't the first time a terror group has directed insults at Trump since his January inauguration. In February, the leader of al Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula taunted the new President after a raid on an al Qaeda compound in Yemen. In that audio message, AQAP leader Qassim al-Rimi condemned the January 29 raid, saying: "The new fool of the White House received a painful slap across his face." A US military review found that up to 12 civilians and 14 enemy fighters died in the Yemen raid. A Navy SEAL, Chief Petty Officer William "Ryan" Owens, also was killed, and three other SEALs were injured, the US military said.  
1491406088	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/05/foodanddrink/2017-world-best-restaurant-awards/index.html	World's 50 best restaurants of 2017 - CNN.com	(CNN)For only the second time in its 15-year history, the World Best Restaurant Awards has named a fine dining venue outside of Europe as the planet's greatest. New York's Eleven Madison Park knocked Italy's Osteria Francescana into second place and pushed Spain's El Celler de Can Roca into third, after seven years climbing the leader board. The 2017 ceremony took place in Melbourne, Australia on April 5, having moved from New York the year before. Eleven Madison Park is the first US winner since California's French Laundry took the grand prize in 2004. It's helmed by Swiss-born chef Daniel Humm, who along with co-owner Will Guidara, delivers modern European food with a New York twist in an art deco building just off Manhattan's Madison Park. The restaurant's seasonal tasting menu, served in a way that blurs the line between kitchen and dining room, celebrates the city's rich history and cultural traditions. Call it a culinary bromance, but as Will Guidara explained exclusively to CNN immediately following the award ceremony: "For us, any time you succeed in anything you need the ability to take stock of what got you there in the first place. For us it's this relationship, this trust, this dynamic. "I work with my best friend and it means that when we're successful we succeed together and when we fall down, we fall down together." Swiss-born Humm added: "We wanted to create one of the great dining rooms of the world but this was only possible because we have each other. There was nothing in the world we can't do." The stage for the World's 50 Best Awards couldn't have been grander, Melbourne's Royal Exhibition Building, a domed pavilion from 1880 where a red carpet thronged with familiar faces in what has been coined the Oscars of the food world. Each of the top 50 chefs -- well, 47 of them who were present -- wore a red sash, while stellar names like Heston Blumenthal wandered the floor followed by selfie-seekers. The father of multi-sensory cuisine -- don't mention the words molecular gastronomy -- Blumenthal brought on a standing ovation as he picked up the Lifetime Achievement Award. French-born Dominique Ansel, who created the cronut at his eponymous New York bakery, picked up the World's Best Pastry Chef award. The Sustainable Restaurant award went to Septime from Paris while the highest new entry was also taken by Paris in the form of Le Pavillon Ledoyen by Yannick Alleno. The Chef's award -- voted for by fellow chefs -- went to Virgilio Martinez from Central in Lima. Barcelona's Disfrutar was named 2017's One to Watch. Last year's One to Watch, Tokyo's Den, made its debut in the Top 50 at No.45. Spain's El Celler de Can Roca -- the World's Best Restaurant in 2013 and 2015 -- won the Art of Hospitality Award. And while female-led restaurants were underrepresented in the awards overall, Slovenia's Ana Ros -- who helms Hiša Franko in the Soca Valley -- was named World's Best Female Chef. The world's 50 best restaurants 1. Eleven Madison Park (New York City) 2. Osteria Francescana (Modena, Italy) *best restaurant in Europe* 3. El Celler de Can Roca (Girona, Spain) 4. Mirazur (Menton, France) 5. Central (Lima) *best restaurant in South America* 6. Asador Etxebarri (Biscay, Spain) 7. Gaggan (Bangkok) *best restaurant in Asia* 8. Maido (Lima, Peru) 9. Mugaritz (San Sebastian, Spain) 10. Steirereck (Vienna) 11. Blue Hill at Stone Barns (Pocantico Hills, New York) *highest climber* 12. Arpege (Paris) 13. Alain Ducasse Au Plaza Athenee (Paris) *highest re-entry* 14. Restaurant Andre (Singapore) 15. Piazza Duomo (Alba, Italy) 16. D.O.M. (Sao Paulo, Brazil) 17. Le Bernardin (New York City) 18. Narisawa (Tokyo, Japan) 19. Geranium (Copenhagen) 20. Pujol (Mexico City) 21. Alinea (Chicago) 22. Quintonil (Mexico City) 23. White Rabbit (Moscow) 24. Amber (Hong Kong) 25. Tickets (Barcelona) 26. Clove Club (London) 27. The Ledbury (London) 28. Nahm (Bangkok) 29. Le Calandre (Rubano, Italy) 30. Arzak (San Sebastian, Spain) 31. Alleno Paris au Pavillon Ledoyen (Paris) *highest new entry* 32. Attica (Melbourne) *best restaurant in Australasia* 33. Astrid (Lima, Peru) 34. De Librije (Zwolle, Netherlands) 35. Septime (Paris) *sustainable restaurant award* 36. Dinner by Heston Blumenthal (London) 37. Saison (San Francisco) 38. Azurmendi (Larrabetzu, Spain) 39. Relae (Copenhagen) 40. Cosme (New York) *new* 41. Ultraviolet by Paul Pairet (Shanghai) 42. Borago (Santiago) 43. Reale (Castel di Sangro, Italy) *new* 44. Brae (Birregurra, Australia) *new* 45. Den (Tokyo) *new* 46. L'Astrance (Paris) 47. Vendome (Bergisch Gladbach, Germany) 48. Restaurant Tim Raue (Berlin) 49. Tegui (Buenos Aires) *new* 50. Hof Van Cleve (Kruishoutem, Belgium)  
1491405791	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/05/politics/trump-today-live-updates/index.html	President Trump today: Live updates - CNNPolitics.com	President Trump meets with the King of Jordan as his White House puts together a response to Syria. Meanwhile, the Senate goes to battle over Neil Gorsuch for Supreme Court. We're covering Trump's 76th day in office in real time.  
1491405691	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/05/arts/oliviero-toscani-photography/index.html	Oliviero Toscani exhibits his 'Magnificent Failures' - CNN.com	(CNN)For the last five decades, Italian photographer Oliviero Toscani has been challenging the status quo with his provocative images. Over the years his oeuvre has been diverse, ranging from fashion editorials and album covers to social awareness campaigns. He's perhaps best known for his work with United Colors of Benetton, where he served as artistic director for more than 20 years. His controversial campaigns addressed subjects such as sexuality, racism, war, capital punishment and AIDS. Challenging the role of the advertising image by fusing commerce with social commentary, many of the campaigns drew criticism and censorship, and even incited lawsuits. For his most recent project, "Razza Humana" (The Human Race), Toscani took portraits of people from around the world to "capture the face of humanity." A new retrospective exhibition of his work in Milan, titled "Oliviero Toscani: More than 50 years of Magnificent Failures," showcases 400 of Toscani's powerful images and campaigns. Speaking to CNN at the exhibition, it's clear the 75-year-old photographer is still not afraid to voice his strong opinions, sounding off on freedom, migration and Donald Trump. "Very few people are free," he explained, "and the few people who are free, they have to work harder to show other people how to get to their freedom." "Oliviero Toscani: More than 50 years of Magnificent Failures" is on until April 28. at Whitelight Art Gallery in Milan.  
1491405621	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/05/politics/jeff-merkley-neil-gorsuch-talk-a-thon/index.html	Jeff Merkley ends 15-hour talk-a-thon against Neil Gorsuch - CNNPolitics.com	(CNN)Sen. Jeff Merkley spoke for more than 15 hours from the Senate floor, laying out his arguments overnight against Neil Gorsuch ahead of a tense showdown over President Donald Trump's Supreme Court nominee at the end of the week. The Oregon Democrat's marathon — with a brief assist from Sen. Dick Durbin of Illinois early Wednesday morning — wrapped up shortly after 10 a.m. ET. His talk-a-thon does nothing to stall a vote on Gorsuch because Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell had already taken the procedural step to lock in a time to vote to end debate over Gorsuch. While Democrats have enough votes to carry out a real filibuster that actually would delay a vote, McConnell said Wednesday that Republicans, who hold a 52-48 majority, have enough votes to overcome that filibuster using the nuclear option and move to a final confirmation vote Friday. RELATED: McConnell starts clock on Neil Gorsuch nuclear showdown Merkley was one of the first Democrats earlier this year to pledge that his party would mount the filibuster, meaning he was confident they could get the 41 votes needed to sustain it. On the floor, Merkley has argued that Gorsuch is not a mainstream nominee and blasted Republicans for blocking consideration of President Barack Obama's nominee of Merrick Garland last year. "For the first time in U.S. history, a seat has been stolen from one president and delivered to another in a court packing scheme," Merkley said around 4 a.m. ET. "And if that were to succeed, it would set a precedent that will haunt the court for decades to come. And it will haunt this body, the Senate, because if a theft succeeds then it changes the analysis of every future Supreme Court vacancy." He and other Democrats have also focused on individual cases in which they felt Gorsuch was unfair to the "little guy" and sided too often with government or corporations. Republicans, hitting back against the argument that he's extreme, say Gorsuch sided with the majority in 99% of his opinions as a federal judge in the past decade, and the GOP said that of the 2,700 cases he has ruled on, 97% were decided unanimously. Merkley made his closing argument shortly after 10 a.m. ET, also calling for the investigations into Trump's campaign ties to Russia to conclude before Gorsuch is further considered. Following his remarks, Merkley went directly to the restroom. He gave the thumbs up to reporters after CNN asked how the senator was doing. RELATED: Supreme Court justices await Senate nuclear option  
1491405546	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/05/politics/fighter-jet-crash-maryland/index.html	US F-16 crashes near Joint Base Andrews - CNNPolitics.com	Washington (CNN)A US F-16 crashed several miles outside Joint Base Andrews in Maryland on Wednesday, two Air Force officials told CNN. The crash took place about six miles outside the base, which is located in Prince George's County, and occurred during a routine training mission, according to Air Force officials. The pilot ejected in "an unpopulated area" and "is OK," one of the officials said, adding that the F-16 was from the 113th Fighter Wing of the Air National Guard, which is assigned to Joint Base Andrews. Additional information, including details about where the jet crashed and damage on the ground, was not immediately made available. Air Force Chief of Staff Gen. David Goldfein addressed the incident at a House Armed Services hearing Wednesday morning. "If you heard jet noises driving into the Capitol, it was likely the F-16s from the 113th Air National Guard Wing at Andrews," Goldfein said. "I learned just walking in this morning that we lost an F-16 from that wing this morning. I'm proud to say at least the news reports are telling us the pilot got out and he's OK." Lockheed Martin's F-16 Fighting Falcon is a multi-role aircraft, built to carry out a variety of missions. The US Air Force currently has just over 1,000 F-16s in its inventory. Known as the "Capital Guardians," the 113th Fighter Wing is charged with defending the nation's Capital and also provides fighter, airlift and support forces capable of local, national and global employment, according to the Air Force. CNN's Jeremy Herb contributed to this report. 
1491405476	http://money.cnn.com/2017/04/05/investing/stocks-jobs-adp/index.html	Bulls return! Stocks jump as more Americans find jobs - Apr. 5, 2017	Trump's views on the jobs report come full circle More Americans are finding work. And Wall Street is loving it. The Dow surged nearly 200 points Wednesday after payroll processor ADP issued a strong jobs report about the private sector. That's raising hopes that the official government figures that will come out Friday morning will also show healthy job gains. ADP said that 263,000 jobs were added in March, well ahead of forecasts for about 175,000. Both ADP and the government reported solid jobs gains for February. So investors appear to be banking that the momentum in the labor market will continue. Powered by SmartAsset.com SMARTASSET.COM The market appears to be back on solid footing after a recent dip following President Trump's failure to push forward on a deal to repeal and replace Obamacare. But investors have expressed hope that Trump will be able to get a tax reform plan approved and possibly a big economic stimulus plan aimed at rebuilding road, bridges and other infrastructure. Related: Jamie Dimon compares Trump to an airline pilot. You have to root for him Bank stocks rallied as well, one day after Trump reiterated plans to try to undo parts of the Dodd-Frank financial reform law. JPMorgan Chase (JPM) CEO Jamie Dimon also said in his annual shareholder letter Tuesday that regulations are holding the economy back. A rebound in oil prices is helping the market too. Crude prices have shot back up to just under $52 a barrel, thanks in part to hopes that OPEC production cuts will relieve some of the supply glut on the market. Oil services firms Halliburton (HAL), Baker Hughes (BHI) and Transocean (RIG) were among the bigger gainers in the S&P 500 Wednesday, while oil giants Exxon Mobil (XOM) and Chevron (CVX) helped lift the Dow. Related: Big Oil could be ready for a big comeback All 30 Dow stocks were in positive territory as of late morning -- and 448 companies in the S&P 500 were trading higher. The recent stock rally has helped push tech stocks like Apple (AAPL, Tech30), Amazon (AMZN, Tech30) and Microsoft (MSFT, Tech30) to all-time highs. The Nasdaq, which is home to these three as well as Facebook (FB, Tech30) and Google parent Alphabet (GOOGL, Tech30), again hit a new record Wednesday. The Nasdaq is now up 10% and is approaching the 6,000 milestone. And CNNMoney's Fear & Greed Index, which measures seven indicators of market sentiment, has bounced back from the Fear levels that it hit just a week ago. It's now in Neutral mode and has inched closer to Greed. A great jobs number Friday might push the index back to Greed -- and lift stocks even higher. CNNMoney (New York) First published April 5, 2017: 11:17 AM ET
1491405240	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/05/politics/republican-faltering-health-care/index.html	Inside the Republican faltering health care 2.0 effort - CNNPolitics.com	Washington (CNN)There is no deal. That was the public and private message of participants in the late night closed-door Tuesday meeting led by Vice President Mike Pence that was designed to clear the way to a vote to repeal the Affordable Care Act. The reason -- and overall dynamics -- aren't new. Conservatives are set on their wish list and Republicans centrists have made clear those requests go too far. But the way lawmakers and the Trump White House have found themselves in the same exact box canyon they wallowed in as the initial iteration of "repeal and replace" imploded less than two weeks ago is illustrative of complexity that continues to dominate -- and plague -- this internal debate. Asked for a status check in the wake of the more than two-hour Tuesday evening affair, one GOP official directly involved was blunt: "No closer to a final deal than we were 24 hours ago, and actually, quite possibly further away than we've ever been." What's driving the current impasse? Confusion. Conservatives in the House Freedom Caucus said Monday night they'd been told very specific things were placed on the table by Pence and Office of Management and Budget Director Mick Mulvaney: Giving states the option of applying for waivers to opt out of three central Obamacare requirements -- essential health benefits,community rating and guaranteed issue. What does that mean? Well, these areas have been identified as crucial by conservatives to reaching their ultimate -- and repeatedly (and repeatedly and repeatedly) stated -- goal: lowering premiums. And that's likely true -- the essential health benefits provision forms the federal floor of what each insurance plan must contain. The guaranteed issue and community rating measures protect those with pre-existing conditions because they require insurers to sell policies to all enrollees, but bar them from charging higher prices to those with health conditions. Community rating also prevents insurers from charging women more. RELATED - More insurers abandon Obamacare. Who might be next? The trade off in providing more robust coverage to individuals regardless of their health status is an increase in the cost of plans. In a sense, these changes would directly undercut Republicans' promise to keep Obamacare's protections for those with pre-existing conditions. But conservatives counter that other provisions in the GOP plan, specifically high risk pools funded run by states but seeded with federal money, would essentially back fill the removal of those regulations, should states opt out. But that's a very, very tough sell to the moderates in the conference, who, according to several who spoke privately with CNN, fear the fallout of including those three opt-out measures in any plan. While amenable to the idea of giving states the option of opting out of essential health benefits, how easily states obtain a waiver remains an open -- and exceedingly important -- question. On top of that, several sources involved in the process said moderates were caught off guard by the news that the other two regulations were on the table. What happened inside last night's meeting? Talk. And lots of it. But there was limited, if any, progress on the thorniest issues: those regulations the White House is explicitly putting on the table in an effort to navigate a compromise. Instead, the discussion settled primarily on the structure and purpose of state run high risk pools, and the possibility of sending more money in that direction via atop the currently allotted $115 billion for a state stability fund. House Energy and Commerce Committee staff briefed on the technical side of everything and circulated some of their own language. But the risk pools were always an accepted area of general agreement. Their inability to even substantively dig in on the key outstanding issues, at least in a way where they start chopping away at the areas of disagreement, "tells you all you need to know about this meeting," one participant said. What was the red flag that things weren't moving forward Tuesday night? There was no legislative text put to the table by the White House. While House GOP staff brought, and circulated, technical language to try and bring members along, even those staffers appeared unclear about what was actually put on the table by the White House, according to one participant involved in the process. Freedom Caucus members insist they're open to the proposal put on the table by Pence and Mulvaney. But member after member from the group say the actual legislative language is crucial and no decisions will be made by the group until that has been put on the table. RELATED: Republicans still searching for a plan B on health care The absence of that language last night was identified as a red flag by participants in all sides of the debate -- and central to the roadblocks that still exist. "I want to make sure I'm clear: there were no agreements tonight," Rep. Mark Meadows, the North Carolina Republican who chairs the Freedom Caucus, told reporters. "There was a general agreement that the progress we're making is really progress." What now? More talk. Lawmaker after lawmaker, seemingly in a coordinated fashion, emerged from the meeting after 10:30 p.m. ET noting that "good progress" had been made. The same players are planning to meet again Wednesday in an effort to hash out agreement on the most difficult issues -- those insurance regulations. But early-week optimism that perhaps a path forward was clearing and, quite possibly, they were on their way to a House floor vote this week, has been decimated. Outside conservative groups, who have stuck firmly behind -- and helped drive -- the Freedom Caucus efforts were preparing to launch a broadside against the party's moderates on Wednesday for standing in the way of what they view as a clear compromise. Majority Leader Kevin McCarthy, R-California, made a surprise visit to the Tuesday meeting which otherwise boasted a grand total of zero participants that came from the party's leadership. But as he departed, he made clear that while lawmakers and the administration were still pushing forward on a bill, it would be "difficult to finish one by the end of the week." The House is currently scheduled to start its two-week Spring recess on Thursday afternoon. As one senior GOP aide involved in the first go-round of "repeal and replace" put it: "Welcome to reality." CNN's Lauren Fox, Deirdre Walsh and Ashley Killough contributed to this report. 
1491405004	http://money.cnn.com/2017/04/05/news/economy/north-korea-economy-china-trump-xi/index.html	How North Korea makes its money: Coal, forced labor and hacking - Apr. 5, 2017	Global banking system under attack President Trump says he's prepared to tackle North Korea's growing nuclear threat with or without China. But he'll need Beijing's help if he wants to choke off the streams of income that keep Kim Jong Un's regime afloat. China is North Korea's economic bedrock, accounting for more than 80% of its smaller neighbor's foreign trade. The U.S. and its allies have tried for years to squeeze the North Korean government's supply of money and cut it off from the global banking system. All that seems to have done is develop Pyongyang's ability to dodge sanctions. "We've been over-prescribing sanctions on the North Korean regime to the point where it has become a superbug," said John Park, director of the Korea Working Group at the Harvard Kennedy School. Related: Trump: US will act unilaterally on North Korea if necessary He says the U.S. needs to persuade China to clean up its trade with North Korea. Others want Washington to come down hard on Chinese companies that are believed to help Pyongyang do business. Dealing with the rogue state will be a central topic when Trump meets Chinese President Xi Jinping for the first time this week. Here's where North Korea gets the cash it needs for its military: Coal Its biggest source of foreign currency is believed to come from the millions of tons of coal it sells to China every year. They accounted for about a third of official exports in 2015. That income was thrown into doubt in February when China said it would halt all coal imports from North Korea for the rest of the year. But experts say Beijing's claims to clamp down on trade often sound tougher than they are. China doesn't want to crush the economy of its neighbor, which it views as a buffer between it and South Korea, a key U.S. ally. "The objective of the coal ban is clearly not to bring down the North Korean regime," Stephan Haggard, a visiting fellow at the Peterson Institute for International Economics, wrote after it was announced. Related: North Korean banks kicked out of global messaging network Traders on both sides of the border have plenty of ways to get around restrictions on the coal business, including off-the-books deals and lax enforcement, analysts say. North Korea also exports other commodities, and basic goods such as iron ore, seafood and clothing, to China. Healthy reserves Even assuming China gets tough on trade, North Korea is thought to have racked up hefty "rainy day" funds from booming coal sales to China, particularly during the spike in global commodity prices in the previous decade. Harvard's Park says he believes Pyongyang has kept "very large sums" in China that the regime can use to buy what it wants for its weapons programs. By keeping the money in China, North Korea can more easily dodge sanctions aimed at cutting it out of the global financial system. Restricting Pyongyang's access to that cash "boils down to the political will of the Chinese authorities to use domestic law to track down these funds," Park said. Related: China's ZTE fined $1.2 billion for breaking sanctions on Iran, North Korea Investigations by the United Nations and the U.S. have also found evidence they say shows North Korea is using networks of front companies to gain access to global banks. Anthony Ruggiero, a senior fellow at the Foundation for Defense of Democracies, suggests the U.S. government could shake things up by fining a Chinese bank for helping North Korea avoid sanctions. "A large fine would send shock waves through the Chinese financial system, causing other Chinese banks to evaluate their compliance procedures," he wrote in an article this week. Related: North Korea flouting sanctions with illegal arms trade, report finds Cyber attacks Since early last year, another potential revenue stream for North Korea has come into focus: hacking banks. The country is now being linked to attacks on financial institutions in 18 countries, according to a new report from Russian cybersecurity firm Kaspersky. "You're looking at a situation where the North Koreans are particularly sophisticated," said Park. "It's a big source of revenue going forward." A cyber heist on Bangladesh's central bank made headlines in March 2016. And Kaspersky researchers say the same hacking operation, which they traced back to North Korea, has also been used in countries as far afield as Costa Rica, Poland and Nigeria. It's just the latest in a long line of illicit ways North Korea is believed to have made money, including trading prohibited weapons and drugs. Related: North Korea-linked hackers are attacking banks worldwide Selling forced labor North Korea has a wealthy elite in the capital, but most of its citizens are impoverished and it has in the past been blighted by famine. It's also one of the most closed economies in the world, but the regime still finds ways to squeeze money out of the people it rules. One way is sending thousands of North Korean workers abroad to toil under forced labor conditions in places like China, Russia and the Middle East, according to a U.N. report from 2015. They are believed to work in industries like mining, logging, textiles and construction. North Korea touts beer, beauty brands The regime has also siphoned money from its population inside the country by setting up department stores and selling cell phones, according to Curtis Melvin, a researcher at the U.S.-Korea Institute at Johns Hopkins University. Some North Koreans manage to amass hard currency through black market trading within the country and across the border with China, experts say. CNNMoney (Hong Kong) First published April 5, 2017: 10:41 AM ET
1491404931	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/04/politics/white-house-north-korea-china/index.html	White House: 'The clock has now run out' on North Korean nuclear program - CNNPolitics.com	Washington (CNN)A senior White House official issued a dire warning to reporters Tuesday on the state of North Korea's nuclear program, declaring "the clock has now run out and all options are on the table." "The clock has now run out, and all options are on the table," the official said, pointing to the failure of successive administration's efforts to negotiate an end to North Korea's nuclear program. The comments came as two senior White House officials briefed reporters ahead of President Donald Trump's meeting with Chinese President Xi Jinping later this week in Florida. The briefing took place on the condition of anonymity. US officials have grown increasingly wary of the pace of North Korea's nuclear and ballistic missile programs as the rogue regime has test-fired multiple ballistic missiles at a rapid clip in the first months of this year. North Korea has successfully detonated nuclear weapons in the past, but experts say the country has yet to develop the technology to equip a ballistic missile with a nuclear warhead. Trump has repeatedly said he plans to urge China to use its influence over North Korea to help halt its nuclear program, but warned in a recent Financial Times interview that he would act to stop North Korea with or without China's cooperation. "China has great influence over North Korea. And China will either decide to help us with North Korea, or they won't. And if they do that will be very good for China, and if they don't it won't be good for anyone," Trump said. "If China is not going to solve North Korea, we will. That is all I am telling you." The senior White House official who issued Tuesday's ominous missive also said North Korea is a "matter of urgent interest for the President and the administration as a whole" and emphasized that "all options are on the table." Those options could include stepped up economic sanctions -- including against Chinese entities that do business with North Korea -- cyberattacks or military action. Earlier Tuesday, Gen. John Hyten, the commander of US Strategic Command, which oversees US nuclear weapons and missile defense forces, contradicted Trump, saying China was critical to solving the North Korea nuclear challenge. "Any solution to the North Korean problem has to involve China," Hyten told the Senate Armed Services Committee. His comments come days after the publication of the Trump interview. Hyten added that while he believed Beijing's involvement was critical, he said that he will provide military options to the president to deal with the threat from North Korea. "I'll provide those military options. So that's my job but I look at it from a strategic perspective and I can't see a solution that doesn't involve China." "China is the definition of North Korea's backyard," Hyten told the committee, saying that the close economic links between Pyongyang and Beijing made China a pivotal player in curbing North Korea's nuclear ambitions. "It's hard for me to see a solution without China," he added. CNN's Ryan Browne contributed to this report. 
1491404833	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/04/politics/tillerson-north-korea-statement/index.html	Rex Tillerson's incredibly odd and confusing statement on North Korea - CNNPolitics.com	(CNN)North Korea has fired a ballistic missile into the sea off the Korean Peninsula, the latest in a series of test firings and one that comes just days before President Donald Trump is set to huddle with Chinese President Xi Jinping for a two-day summit in Florida. Here's what Secretary of State Rex Tillerson, aka the nation's top diplomat, had to say about the latest provocation from North Korea: "North Korea launched yet another intermediate range ballistic missile. The United States has spoken enough about North Korea. We have no further comment." That's a total of 23 words, if you're counting. Twenty-three words that leave you more confused when you get to the end of them than when you started. Is Tillerson trying to talk tough? Or is he refusing to give North Korea the attention he thinks they're trying to grab in advance of the US-China meeting? Somewhere in between? Neither? Both? North Korea fires ballistic missile, US State Department says The statement reads, to channel Winston Churchill, like a riddle, wrapped in a mystery, inside an enigma. It's Ernest Hemingway but for complicated and delicate matters of foreign policy. It's, in a (hyphenated) word, a head-scratcher. What we do know is that the Trump administration is taking an increasingly hard line to both North Korea's ongoing efforts to develop nuclear and ballistic weapons programs and China's willingness to constrain those efforts. "The clock has now run out, and all options are on the table," a senior White House official told reporters Tuesday night in a briefing with reporters ahead of Xi's visit. That sentiment echoes the President himself, who told the Financial Times in an interview that he was prepared to act to curb North Korea's nuclear ambitions with or without China. "China has great influence over North Korea," Trump said in the interview. "And China will either decide to help us with North Korea, or they won't ... If China is not going to solve North Korea, we will. That is all I am telling you." Viewed through that lens, Tillerson's statement may be best understood as a sort of "the time for talking is over, the time for action is here" sentiment that is in keeping with the tough talk coming from Trump. In departure from Trump, US general says China must be part of North Korea solution But, Tillerson is the country's top diplomat -- the person charged with finding solutions that go beyond simple rhetoric to these thorniest of foreign policy challenges. And his statement -- such as it is -- offers zero guidance as to what the US response will be. Pyongyang wants Washington's acceptance as a nuclear power -- and to be dismissed in this way will be a blow, noted CNN's Paula Hancocks in Seoul. And two senior US officials tell CNN's Barbara Starr that the message shouldn't be interpreted as provocative. Instead, they say, it's a signal the State Department will no longer put out routine statements after every North Korean provocation or missile launch. But vagueness in diplomacy is a dangerous thing. Words matter. Misunderstandings can cause international incidents -- or worse. How will North Korea and China interpret Tillerson's comments? As a provocation? A dismissal? Something else entirely? That uncertainty is the point. Tillerson is the leading edge of America foreign policy. As such, his most important job is to ensure that other countries know exactly where the US stands when a major international event -- like the one in North Korea -- occurs. His statement Tuesday night suggests he simply doesn't grasp just how much words matter.  
1491404686	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/04/us/i-85-atlanta-fire-collapse/index.html	I-85 collapse: Atlanta highway could be fixed by June 15 - CNN.com	Atlanta (CNN)The traffic headaches from last week's collapse of an elevated portion of Interstate 85 in Atlanta could be over faster than initially thought. June 15 is now the target date for completing the replacement of I-85's damaged sections, state transportation Commissioner Russell McMurry said Tuesday -- sooner than previous estimates of at least several months. He called it a "very aggressive but attainable date" and "much better than our initial thought." GDOT's chief engineer, Meg Pirkle, detailed a few factors that she said is expediting the process: • The state has redesigned the span to incorporate a type of beam that is in standard use today, as opposed to beams that were called for in the span's original, 1980s design. The other beam type would have taken longer to manufacture. • Accelerated-curing concrete will be used. This is not typically done because it is expensive, Pirkle said, but it will be used here because of the state's desire to get the stretch back in operation. • Not all columns will be rebuilt from the foundations. Some will be retrofitted, instead. • A design team of 15 to 20 engineers worked throughout the weekend and submitted the final plan at midnight Sunday. "Completion of these plans in just three days is a huge milestone," Pirkle said. State will review storage policies; NTSB investigating McMurry said the state will review its policies on storing materials under bridges and elevated highways -- an issue in this case because authorities say last Thursday's fire started where the state kept high-density plastic conduits and other construction materials. The state was storing high-density polyethylene (HDPE) pipes and fiberglass conduits under the I-85 overpass, and the fire spread to the pipes, McMurry said. Authorities say they've arrested a man accused of intentionally setting the fire. The materials were in a state-owned lot under the overpass, behind a chain-linked fence with a locked gate, with a "no trespassing" sign, McMurry said. The National Transportation Safety Board is investigating the collapse and says the appropriateness of storing the materials under the span will be among the topics covered. "A couple points of interest include the integrity of the infrastructure, the flammability of the materials and the issue of storing flammable material under a bridge," NTSB spokesman Keith Holloway said. McMurry said the storage is not believed to have broken any current state policy, but also that lessons could be learned -- especially about whether the material was stored securely enough. "Obviously, what we know now, if we knew then, we would not have the material stored in the fashion that it was stored," he said, responding to question about how secure the site was. "The gating and the fencing was really to keep the material from being stolen or removed from the area." McMurry said he already sent a letter to other states' department of transportation officials "to make sure they may want to make a full assessment" about what they are storing under their bridges and how they are doing it. "Hopefully, (there will) be lessons learned, not only for Georgia, but the nation," he said of the coming review. How the fire, collapse happened The fire started under I-85 in northeast Atlanta, north of the highway's split with I-75. At first, I-85 motorists drove through the smoke, and firefighters fought the flames below. It eventually grew into a massive fireball; the road was closed and firefighters withdrew as the structure weakened. A portion of northbound I-85 collapsed, injuring no one. In total, about 700 feet of northbound and southbound I-85 must be replaced, officials say. The closure is proving to be a major challenge for motorists in one of the country's most congested cities. Traffic is being diverted to already heavily traveled I-75, I-285 and surface streets. Police arrested Basil Eleby on suspicion of setting the fire. He is charged with first-degree arson and criminal damage to property. Police also arrested two companions of his on charges of trespassing, alleging that they were with Eleby at the time; investigators say they believe all three are homeless. According to an affidavit obtained by CNN, one of the companions "watched Basil Eleby place a chair on top of a shopping cart, reach under the shopping cart and ignited it." Eleby told investigators that he and his companions talked about smoking cocaine under the highway overpass, according to the affidavit. He said he decided to smoke without his companions, and left before the fire started, the affidavit said. Plastic pipes had been there since roughly 2011 The fire eventually burned the HDPE pipes, which the state had stored there since about 2011, McMurry said. HDPE pipes encase and protect cables, and are widely used in the transportation industry to build "smart" highways that provide information to drivers, control traffic signal lights and tollways. Details about the fire and how it brought down the highway are under investigation. The flammability of HDPE is relatively low, said Tony Radoszewski, president of the Plastics Pipe Institute, a trade group based in Irving, Texas. HDPE would have to be exposed to a high-temperature flame for a considerable amount of time to burn, he said. "Somebody had to start a fire. It doesn't combust by itself, it needs fuel," Radoszewski told CNN. "Someone had to do it. It's not like someone would have dropped a match and it started." McMurry also has said that HDPE's flammability -- the ease at which something can be set on fire -- is low, and that it is "not uncommon" for states to store construction materials under bridges. But he said Tuesday the state checked what was being stored under bridges after last week's fire, and no other bridge in Georgia had been found to have HDPE stored under it. Pipes came from halted project The HDPE and fiberglass conduits were meant for a project that a contractor bid for in 2007, McMurry said. The contractor was to install advanced traffic management systems -- like cameras and message boards -- along State Route 400 between I-85 and I-285, McMurry said. But the contractor defaulted in 2008. The project eventually was done by a different contractor, who used different materials, the commissioner said. So, GDOT, which already paid for the unused conduits, took control of them "in hopes that it could be used for another project," McMurry said. The conduits initially were stored near an intersection of a surface street and State Route 13. By around 2011, McMurry said, they were moved to the lot under I-85, where the fire happened last week. CNN's Michelle Krupa, Steve Almasy and Rene Marsh contributed to this report. 
1491404368	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/05/politics/kfile-rubio-tillerson-syria-attack/index.html	Rubio: It's no coincidence that Syria gas attack happened after 'concerning' Tillerson comments - CNNPolitics.com	(CNN)Republican Sen. Marco Rubio said Wednesday that he doesn't think it's a coincidence that a suspected chemical weapons attack in Syria occurred shortly after Secretary of State Rex Tillerson suggested Syrian President Bashar Al-Assad could remain in power. "In this case now, we have very limited options and look, it's concerning that the secretary of state, 72 hours ago or a week ago, last Friday, said that the future's up to the people in Syria on what happens with Assad. In essence almost nodding to the idea that Assad was gonna get to stay in some capacity," Rubio said on the show "AM Tampa Bay." "I don't think it's a coincidence that a few days later we see this," Rubio concluded. Dozens died in an attack on Tuesday that activists said was committed by Assad's regime. The U.S. has also placed blame on Assad for the attack. Last week in Turkey, Tillerson said, "I think the status and the longer-term status of President Assad will be decided by the Syrian people." Other lawmakers, such as fellow Republican Sen. John McCain, have also rebuked Tillerson and the Trump administration. McCain said on CNN's "New Day" that he was sure that the Assad regime was "encouraged to know that the United States is withdrawing" from the conflict. In the radio interview, Rubio said he believes Assad will get away with the attack. "Assad believes and sadly he may be right that he can gas his people with sarin, kill children, kill innocent civilians, people will complain, there'll be a meeting at the UN Security Council and then life will go on and he'll stay in power," he said. "He's made that calculation. The Russians support him on it. China is indifferent. And I hate to say this, I think he's gonna get away with it again."  
1491404235	http://money.cnn.com/2017/04/05/news/us-womens-soccer-equal-pay/index.html	U.S. women's soccer team reaches labor deal with U.S. Soccer - Apr. 5, 2017	Carli Lloyd: 'We put just as much effort in as men do' The U.S. Women's National Soccer Team has ratified a labor deal with U.S. Soccer, the sport's governing body. Players have complained that their pay and treatment is unequal to the men's team. The terms of the deal were not immediately clear. The agreement runs through 2021, meaning it will cover the women's team's participation in the 2019 FIFA Women's World Cup and the 2020 Olympics. The two sides released a joint statement on Wednesday announcing the deal and said it will help grow the game around the world and improve the lives of players. "We are proud of the hard work and commitment to thoughtful dialogue reflected through this process, and look forward to strengthening our partnership moving forward," the statement said. Related: US women's hockey team scores better pay, same benefits as men In addition to alleging that they were paid less than players on the men's national team, the women's team claimed they received less money for daily expenses while traveling. The women play more games and have a better record. They won the Women's World Cup in 2015. U.S. Soccer argued that the men's team brings in more money, including more lucrative TV deals, and draws bigger crowds. In March, five players on the women's team, Hope Solo, Alex Morgan, Megan Rapinoe, Carli Lloyd and Becky Sauerbrunn, brought a complaint against U.S. Soccer before the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission. That complaint has not been resolved. Related: Carli Lloyd and Alex Morgan head overseas amid US fight for 'Equal Play, Equal Pay' The labor deal comes a day after Equal Pay Day, which is meant to raise awareness about the gender pay gap. It also comes after the U.S. Women's National Hockey Team won a historic victory for women's sports. After more than a week of protest, the players reached a deal with USA Hockey that guarantees them better pay and the same benefits as the men's team. CNNMoney (New York) First published April 5, 2017: 10:11 AM ET
1491404197	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/02/health/unseen-enemy-deadly-influenza-epidemic-gwen-zwanziger/index.html	How my daughter died from a simple case of flu - CNN.com	Gwen and Terry Zwanziger's 17-year-old daughter Shannon died unexpectedly in 2014 after losing a battle with influenza. Their story is included in CNN Films' "Unseen Enemy," premiering Friday, April 7 at 9 p.m. ET/PT on CNN. Owatonna, Minnesota (CNN)It's Day 836. I've cried more times today than I can count. You'd think by now, I could go days without crying, but I can't get over the guilt. Shannon's only complaint was a sore throat. Her fever wasn't even scary.  I spent (wasted is a better word) most of my morning Googling flu information again today. The complex science of mutating viruses leaves me boggled. If I can't make sense of it, how can I explain the importance of stopping the flu to others? After more than two years, my husband Terry and I haven't said the "D" word yet. We say "she went to heaven." We say "she left." Although I have said, "she died" several times, we somehow can't say the words "Shannon is d..."  No dreams of Shannon last night. I want to see you again so bad. If I could just talk to her one last time. Tell her how sorry I am. Does she know? Can she see from heaven? I have mixed feelings about how things work up there, I just know they do. Going through some books, I came across one of her homemade bookmarks she made, when she was little. I got a card from the donation center. They're doing a curb pick up next week for "gently used clothing." I can't do it yet.  There are pieces she hardly wore -- her new clothes for senior year -- that she only just began to wear. So yeah, they're gently used. Just barely used.  Flu Moms Day 837 is turning out to be an especially bad one. This is the kind of day I should go on Facebook and talk to the other mothers on our private page called "Flu Moms." Last time I got on, I noticed a couple of new names. Clearly children are still dying. I thank God for this group of moms. We can vent and encourage depending on our own mood -- a safe place to share how we feel and how we cope. Some of the mothers have developed nonprofits to honor their little ones. They plant municipal flowerbeds and organize 5k runs to raise money for awareness. God bless their efforts. 'Let it run its course' The seasonal flu kills healthy, active, precious kids every year. Shannon went to school on a Wednesday, came home like always, but said a friend "gave" her the flu. I sent her up to her room and began the same things any parent would do.  I brought her liquids, applesauce, and soup. She complained of a sore throat, so her dad brought home throat spray, Tylenol, throat lozenges, and a little gift. She developed a fever, but not so high to take her to the ER. Later that week, I thought she ought to be feeling better, so I wondered if she was taking advantage of days off of school and being waited on. I'd go into her room and her eyes would be closed. I couldn't tell if she was faking or not. I took her cell phone and tucked it under the clean laundry I'd put on her dresser for her to put away. Next time I went in, she had the phone back, so I knew she was OK. By Sunday, she just seemed weak. She was texting and watching TV, but she wasn't eating good and she seemed lethargic. So I sent her to the clinic with her dad, with a little journal of her temperature readings, liquid intake and even her O2 sats. I didn't go with them because I wanted to clean her room and change her sheets. All nice and fresh for her, you know? Terry sent me a picture of Shannon sitting in a wheelchair with a mask on, leaning her head on his shoulder. That's the last picture we have of her.  When they returned home, she walked in through the back door and said the visit to the doctor was a waste of time. The doctor just said it was the flu and to "let it run its course." The doctor didn't have a lot of time to spend with her, because the waiting room was packed with people who seemed to have the flu also. Her high school had something like 150 kids who were out of school with it. Thirty-four hours later, Shannon came downstairs. When she went into the bathroom, she tapped on the shower curtain, so I helped her into the tub. By this time I was sweating with fear. I hadn't helped her with a bath since she was little. Something was horribly wrong. When she leaned back in the tub and I saw her eyes, I knew she was dying. I got behind her and lifted her out. I sat on the toilet with her sitting on my lap and she died. There was nothing that could be done to save her. Health care professionals — from ambulance EMTs to the mighty Mayo Clinic — couldn't bring her back to me. The flu destroyed her organs. She didn't even know it. 'What if' Shannon chose not to get vaccinated. I wish she had. If I had pushed her into getting a flu shot, then I wouldn't have the guilt about "what if." What if the vaccine had given her a little extra control over the invasion? That's what the vaccine should do. While you can still get the flu even if you've had a flu shot, it can reduce the risk of serious illness and complications. Please take the flu seriously. Keep your loved ones home if you even think they might be sick. Or else you might live wondering if a classmate died because your child brought that strain into the classroom.  Talk openly about the flu. Make people around you aware that the flu is deadly. Talk to every leader you can.  Companies need to be more understanding about passing the flu around the work place and letting people stay home. Our government needs to hear from us. They need to be more transparent, honest and forthcoming about the seriousness. We need to get our scientists to find a universal flu vaccine. There are research efforts underway working on this. Instead of guessing in the spring which strains to put into the vaccine, they need a vaccine that will nip it in its core. Please take action. If we do nothing, then we are all to blame. And believe me, guilt will change your life. I was just a regular mom of a regular kid. Now I'm a shell of the person I was. And the world will never see what Shannon could have become.  
1491404172	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/03/health/pandemic-risk-virus-bacteria/index.html	Global pandemics: 7 reasons we're more at risk - CNN.com	(CNN)It could take just one cough, one kiss, one touch or even one bite to change not only your life, but the lives of everyone around you -- and for months or even years. In most cases, the closer those people are to you, the greater the risk. But it isn't always that simple. The risk at hand: an infectious outbreak. Public health experts believe we are at greater risk than ever of experiencing large-scale outbreaks and global pandemics like those we've seen before: SARS, swine flu, Ebola and Zika. More than 28,000 people were infected during the 2014-16 Ebola epidemic, with over 11,000 deaths. And as of March 10, 84 countries have reported Zika transmission. That disease was discovered in the 1940s, but had its first outbreak in 2007 in Micronesia, and more recently began spreading toward the end of 2015. Every time, the infection's arrival is unexpected and its scale unprecedented, leaving the world vulnerable. Experts are unanimous in the belief that the next outbreak contender will most likely be a surprise -- and we need to be ready. "We're only as secure in the world as the weakest country," said Jimmy Whitworth, professor of international public health at the London School of Hygiene & Tropical Medicine. With so many health systems and economies in a fragile state, this means we are far from secure. "Infectious diseases respect no boundaries," he said. The World Health Organization is alerted to hundreds of small outbreaks every month, he noted, which it investigates and uses to predict the chances of a bigger problem. "There are little clusters of outbreaks occurring all the time, all over the place," Whitworth said. But with infections disregarding borders and their battle lines against humans drawn, he believes the way we live today is what opens us up to risk. "(Many) aspects of modern life put us at more risk. We are more ready than before," he points out, highlighting the International Health Regulations Global Outbreak Alert and Response Network and countries with national rapid response teams -- such as the United States, UK and China -- ready to tackle any emergency. "But the stakes keep getting raised," he said. Here's why. 1. Growing populations and urbanization The facts around urban living are simple: You live, eat, work and move closer to people than in any rural setting, and with this comes greater opportunity for disease to spread through air, mosquitoes or unclean water. As populations grow, so will the number of city-dwellers, with the United Nations predicting that 66% of the global population will live in urban areas by 2050. More people in cities can "put a strain on sanitation," said David Heymann, head of the Centre for Global Health Security at the think tank Chatham House. Beyond people's close proximity, "this is a second source of infection," he said, and a third is increased food demand, causing farmers to grow more food, with more animals, making them likely to live closer to those animals as well. Animals are reservoirs for many diseases, including cattle for tuberculosis and African sleeping sickness (trypanosomiasis) and poultry for avian flu. With people moving more regularly from -- and between -- rural settings to urban ones, the chances of them becoming infected and then living in close quarters with others further boosts the potential for things to spread. 2. Encroaching into new environments As numbers of people grow, so does the amount of land needed to house them. Populations expand into previously uninhabited territories, such as forests. With new territories comes contact with new animals and, inevitably, new infections. For one example, "Lassa fever occurs because people live in the forest and destroy it for farming," Heymann said. Lassa fever is a viral disease spread by contact with the feces of infected rodents. It can cause fever and hemorrhaging of various parts of the body, including the eyes and nose. Person-to-person transmission is also possible, albeit less common. Outbreaks generally occur in West Africa, with higher than expected rates in Nigeria since 2016. Heymann explains that Lassa is one example of people living near forest environments where infected rodents reside, but destruction of those forests for agriculture leaves the animals nowhere to go -- other than humans' homes. "The rodents that live there can't get food and go into human areas for food," he said. 3. Climate change Evidence continues to emerge that climate change is resulting in greater numbers of heat waves and flooding events, bringing more opportunity for waterborne diseases such as cholera and for disease vectors such as mosquitoes in new regions. "Flooding is occurring with increased frequency," Heymann said, and with that comes greater risk of outbreaks. Between 2030 and 2050, climate change is projected to cause about 250,000 additional deaths per year from heat stress, malnutrition and the spread of infectious diseases like malaria, according to the World Health Organization. With disease carriers like mosquitoes increasingly able to live in new unprotected territory, the risk of an outbreak is high. Whitworth cited the current yellow fever outbreak in Angola, which has infected more than 350 people. He explained that as workers from China returned home from Angola, any yellow fever infection could have been transmitted by mosquitoes in China. But, the workers' return in winter meant the insects weren't around to transmit through bites. 4. Global travel "We're vulnerable because of increased travel," Whitworth said. International tourist arrivals reached a record of almost 1.2 billion in 2015, according to the UN World Tourism Organization, 50 million more than 2014. It was the sixth consecutive year of above-average growth. And with greater numbers moving at all times come greater options for infections to hop a ride. "Infectious agents travel around in humans many times within their incubation period," Heymann said. An incubation period is the time between infection and the onset of symptoms, meaning people can transmit an infection though they won't appear to be sick. The SARS (severe acute respiratory syndrome) pandemic of 2003 is thought to have begun with Dr. Liu Jianlun, who developed symptoms of the airborne virus on a trip to Huang Xingchu in China and then went to visit family in Hong Kong. He infected people at his hotel and his family. He was then hospitalized and died, as did one of his relatives. In less than four months, about 4,000 cases and 550 deaths from SARS could be traced to Liu's stay in Hong Kong. More than 8,000 other people became infected across more than 30 countries worldwide. But Heymann stresses that "it's not just humans" who spread disease through travel. Infections spread through insects, food and animals moved between countries. "It's also trade," he said, pointing to airport malaria, in which people in airports have become infected with malaria through mosquitoes that have hitched a ride on a plane or in food. He also described bird flu that was stopped at the Belgian border in Thai eagles being traded as pets in 2004. Guinea rats shipped as pets in the United States in 2003 harbored infections with monkey pox, he noted, which then entered prairie dogs and eventually humans. 5. Civil conflict "If a health system cannot handle (an outbreak), there's pandemonium," Heymann said. He believes that poor hygiene is not a valid excuse anywhere, even in developing settings, as sterilization and hand-washing are straightforward. But if a country is on the brink of breakdown from civil unrest, the ability to handle an intense and sudden problem like an outbreak could bring its people to their knees -- and allow the infection to flourish. "Outbreaks can completely paralyze countries," said Whitworth, citing the 2014 Ebola epidemic in which Sierra Leone, Guinea and Liberia were "quite close to collapsing." Civil unrest had plagued all three countries, leaving their economic and health infrastructures in dire need of rebuilding -- and ill-prepared for a major infection to strike. That problem combined with human movement between these three countries and others more globally meant Ebola was able to spread, even though dozens of infections in previous years in nearby Democratic Republic of Congo were self-contained and often resolved themselves. "If (an infection) stays local, it burns out," Heymann said. "People learn what to do." 6. Fewer doctors and nurses in outbreak regions Beyond weak health systems, countries where outbreaks are more likely to occur -- namely, more developing settings -- also have fewer doctors and nurses to treat the population. Most have left for better prospects elsewhere. "We have to deal with that as a reality," Heymann said, adding that some countries even encourage young medical talent to travel to new regions. "It's difficult to manage health worker migration," he said. But programs and strategies are underway to tackle this by "task-shifting," moving responsibilities to new groups and training them to deliver care, such as community health workers. "Communities have to be resilient," he said, and assigning tasks to people at all levels could mean a greater team available when a new infection strikes. 7. Faster information In the information age, new levels of communication bring even newer levels of fear and multiple ways to spread it, experts believe. Although the majority of small outbreaks may once have gone largely unknown by populations farther from the epicenter, people today are more informed than ever and require transparent, factual information to be fast-flowing. Google has been been using searches for symptoms to help identify when an outbreak may occur, such as with the flu. "The world looks for an authority," said Heymann, who believes the WHO adopts that role but needs to be faster and more transparent with information. The organization was criticized for being too slow to respond and unprepared for the 2014 Ebola outbreak. "But social media has become active ... and that's an area that's difficult to control," he said. The posting and shaping of information by multiple people can change messaging and what people read and believe, Heymann added. It may not all be bad, he said, but the point is that it can shape the way information travels, potentially inciting fear and stigma. "Not all information on the internet or social media is accurate," said Mark Feinberg, chairman of the scientific advisory committee of the recently launched Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness Innovations. "Ensuring accurate communication to the public is critically important." The coalition, launched in January, will address the surprise nature of outbreaks and epidemics to try to prevent them, rather than respond to them. Lining up the elements Heymann describes the likelihood of a new infection spreading rapidly and becoming an epidemic -- and potentially a global pandemic -- using the analogy of lining up pieces of Swiss cheese, with the different risk factors equating to holes in the cheese. "When they line up, you get an epidemic," he said. He highlighted an outbreak of Rift Valley virus in East Africa in 1997. The combination of an El Niño event pushing humans away from their homes and closer to cattle, combined with increased rainfall producing more breeding sites for disease-spreading mosquitoes, led to the largest documented outbreak of this virus. It involved five countries and infected an estimated 90,000 people. "All these (factors) came together and led to an outbreak," Heymann said. Despite what we know about the aspects of modern life that put us at greater risk, all three experts believe the world is not quite ready to handle what is inevitably coming. "We need to do a lot better," Feinberg said. "We need to prepare in advance, not respond." His program, the Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness Innovations, is working to do just that. It's aiding the development of vaccines against viruses that it believes need attention and are in families of infections that are likely to pose a risk, such as MERS CoV, which continues to persist in the Middle East and has been reported in almost 20 countries outside that region. The program will also be looking to develop platforms on which vaccines can be made more rapidly so that the general development time frame of 15 to 20 years can be shrunk significantly to respond to a new virus -- even moreso than those being developed against Ebola and Zika. "That's the kind of capability we need," Feinberg said. "The pathogens we don't know about pose the greatest threat." Combined with other global and national strategies programs -- such as WHO regulations and national response teams -- Feinberg is optimistic. "We are far away from that goal," he said. "But I am encouraged, as they are all working on this."  
1491403892	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/05/us/believer-what-do-you-believe-stories-roundup/index.html	We are what we believe: What you told us about faith - CNN.com	Editor's Note: "Believer with Reza Aslan" airs Sunday nights at 10 p.m. ET, following "Finding Jesus" at 9 p.m. ET on CNN. (CNN)Each of the nearly 7.5 billion people on this planet is a complex product of our upbringing, culture, and an inestimable number of other factors. But nothing informs how we live quite like what we believe. On the CNN Original Series "Believer," Reza Aslan traveled the globe and immersed himself in the world's most fascinating faiths with that in mind. And in the process, CNN went on a related journey, seeking answers to one question: What do you believe? Since February, more than 600 members of our global audience have shared with us what they believe and how they came to realize it -- from chance encounters to life-changing tragedies to supernatural visions. For many others, their quest for understanding continues, with no end in sight. Here's what we learned from your stories. You've been passionate from a young age For all those still wandering, uncertain of what they truly believe, there are others who have always known: the "true believers." Michael Lowry, a self-described atheist, says it's what he DIDN'T believe in that dawned on him at a very young age. Lowry said he grew up in a Christian community but Sunday school ended up pushing him away from organized religion. "Belief can be a dangerous thing ..." Michael Lowry Atheist Rachel Hutto says God helped her survive a difficult childhood, which solidified her unwavering Christian faith. At 14 years old, a debate in English class led Ben V. to fully understand the power of his relationship with a higher power. You know everything can change in an instant We spend much of our lives searching for answers about God and the afterlife, but it's often specific events that crystallize beliefs. Brian Brandsmeier, a Buddhist, achieved "enlightenment" about the universe and his place in it thanks to a life-changing lecture from Neil deGrasse Tyson. For Ron Rhodes, a night spent alone under the stars in Colorado's Mueller State Park proved the existence of God -- and helped him kick his pack-a-day smoking habit. "... I pulled out my pack of Marlboros and I crushed them." Ron Rhodes "A child of gods" Even lifelong believers can have their faith rekindled in unlikely ways. For Jane France, a "Protestant Christian for over 70 years," it was her new neighbors -- a family of Muslim refugees -- who helped illuminate the similarities that unite all who worship God. You think actions speak louder than words It's cliché, yes, but it also rings true for so many. Judging by the responses, several of you feel it matters far less what you believe than how you act on your beliefs. Majel Moon-Brumley believes in personal responsibility, the interconnectedness of all living things, and above all, the power of kindness. "... If we use kindness as our prime mover, we can transform the world." Majel Moon-Brumley Buddhist Nearly losing her son during surgery gave Jenn Coolidge a new perspective on life; our time on this Earth is short, so it's time we start making the most of it. And Gilgamesh, who was raised Catholic but today describes himself as "humanist," said the overall message of the major religions is mostly the same -- it's how we put that message into action that matters. You find strength in believing (or not) Faith is a stabilizing force for many facing hardship. And then there are others, like David Brown Jr., who are able to discover what they really believe in as a result of tragic circumstances. For Brown, it was an unimaginable crisis -- the abduction of his 11-month-old daughter -- and his struggle to forgive the perpetrator that made him a believer in the "power of love." "'Daddy, everything is going to be OK.'" David Brown Jr. "Connected to something bigger than me" Angela was raised Christian, but the death of her grandmother when she was 10 years old led her to question everything she thought to be true. She explored other religions, and found that the only thing that made sense to her is nature, which forms the basis of what she calls her loosely Wiccan beliefs. In hard times, sometimes all we need is a sign to show us that everything will be OK, that we aren't alone. After Hurricane Ike damaged his home in 2008, Clark Wiginton says he returned over a month later to find a surprising "love letter" that reaffirmed his faith in Jesus. You seek beyond major religions History is littered with evidence of humans' attempts to answer life's key questions. In modern times, most have found understanding through the world's major religions. But for some, it's the messages of other faiths -- including ancient ones -- that resonate for them. Stephen Garth says he "did them all" -- dabbling in Islam, Christianity and other religions -- but he finally found what he was seeking through Ifa, a faith that traces its roots to West Africa. "... If we use kindness as our prime mover, we can transform the world." Stephen Garth Ifa (Yoruba religion) Francis Marino grew up in the Catholic Church, but was exposed to the stories of Norse gods in high school English class. Marino says the gods of Norse Paganism provide an example we can aspire to because much like us mortals, their gods are hardly perfect. You believe the search for meaning never ends That we may never have all the answers we seek can be hard to accept, but for some in our audience, the idea is liberating, fuel for a life of curiosity and exploration. Abhinand Raghavan identifies as Hindu, but says his "very religious" upbringing brought with it feelings of guilt when he fell short of adhering to the "rules of God" -- until he realized the challenge of becoming a better man was one he had to tackle on his own. "That was something that I had to figure out by myself." Abhinand Raghavan Hindu For K. Robinson, exploration of the world's religions began after leaving home at age 22. That quest has led Robinson to a simple but powerful conclusion: Regardless of what you believe, striving to be a better person is all that matters. Howard Acosta points to a remarkable experience as a child as the event that launched a personal faith journey. While mostly prescribing to Christianity today, Acosta does "adhere to other truths in several other faiths," and believes there's more to this world than what we can touch and see.  
1491403764	http://money.cnn.com/2017/04/05/news/economy/odebrecht-latin-america-corruption/index.html	Odebrecht: The company that created the world's biggest bribery ring - Apr. 5, 2017	Brazil's Olympic legacy? An abandoned Maracana It's the largest global corruption scandal in modern history. Its web of bribes spread over four continents, implicated presidents and involved 12 countries. It also prompted the biggest fine ever levied by the U.S. Justice Department -- $3.5 billion. At the center of this scandal is a company that few in the United States recognize: Odebrecht. Based in Brazil, Odebrecht is Latin America's largest construction firm. It doled out nearly $800 million in bribes to individuals between 2001 and 2016. Some bribes filtered through the United States. Powered by SmartAsset.com SMARTASSET.COM Investigators are determining whether the bribes extended to construction contracts for the 2016 Rio Summer Olympics and 2014 FIFA World Cup. Some former Latin American presidents face potential jail time for allegedly being involved in the bribes and one has gone missing. Related: Brazil dives deeper into its worst recession in history This month, a U.S. judge will rule whether Odebrecht must pay the record-setting fine announced in December. The fine could go as high as $4.5 billion. Odebrecht, which pled guilty, says it can't pay either amount. Most of its bribes were paid to get contracts from governments to build roads, bridges, dams and highways. Odebrecht officials shipped cash across the globe -- from one shell bank account to the next -- en route to politicians' pockets in a dozen countries, including Mexico, Venezuela, Colombia, Argentina, Peru and Mozambique. Bribes sometimes went through as many as four shell bank accounts before arriving at the final destination, according to the firm's plea agreement with U.S. officials. The fine -- coordinated by the U.S., Brazil and Switzerland -- only marks the start of Odebrecht's financial pain. Several Latin American countries are opening up their own cases and could issue more fines. Related: Brazilian firm hit with record high $3.5 billion fine "This case is the most important and momentous investigation into corruption crimes in the history of the region," Sergio Rodriguez, Argentina's federal prosecutor investigating Odebrecht, told CNNMoney. The first signs of bribery popped up three years ago in a Brazilian investigation dubbed "Operation Car Wash" which led to the arrest of an executive at Petrobras, Brazil's government-run oil company. Petrobras also played a leading role in the bribery ring. The corruption probe across Petrobras and Odebrecht has imprisoned Brazil's most prominent politicians and business owners. The scandal is a central reason why Brazil is in its worst recession in history. The Petrobras executive later named names in a plea agreement. Investigators later found that Odebrecht replicated its bribery model across most of Latin America and Africa. Related: One-time powerful Brazilian lawmaker sentenced to 15 years in jail The case continues to reverberate globally. In March, Colombian president Juan Manuel Santos admitted his re-election campaign in 2014 accepted a donation from Odebrecht. Santos said he had no knowledge of its origin and called for an investigation. Odebrecht received public works contracts from the Colombian government. In February, police in Peru raided the home of former president Alejandro Toledo for allegedly accepting a Odebrecht bribe. Toledo denied the charges via Twitter but has gone missing, is thought to be in the U.S., and could face jail time. Related: Brazil's ex-president hit with corruption charges Brazil's former president, Luiz Inacio Lula da Silva, faces potential prison time for allegedly accepting Odebrecht's paying for his family's vacation home. His successor, former Brazilian president Dilma Rousseff, was impeached last year for separate charges, though the massive corruption scandal loomed over her ousting. Last week, Brazil's former House Speaker, Eduardo Cunha, got 15 years in prison for, among three charges, money laundering bribes involving Petrobras, Odebrecht and politicians. Brazil's current president, Michel Temer, has lost five of his cabinet officials since taking office in May. Many of them resigned after bribery allegations involving Odebrecht surfaced. The company's former chief executive, Marcelo Odebrecht, was sentenced to 19 years in prison a year ago. In Argentina, Rodriguez, the federal prosecutor, is starting to investigate $35 million in Odebrecht bribes to middle men that allegedly gave the money to Argentine government leaders. He says he doesn't know how many people are involved or how long the case will take. More charges are likely in the pipeline across Latin America. Related: Brazil's spoiled meat scandal widens To get shorter prison terms, Odebrecht officials struck plea deals with investigators, naming names and giving details about the breadth of the scheme during closed door testimonies. Much of their testimonies is still sealed up but leaks have revealed hints at what's to come. The music could stop for many more government leaders across the continent once the full testimony is public later this year. "The tentacles potentially go sea deep in the Brazilian government," says Kathleen Hamann, a lawyer at the firm Pierce Atwood and former U.S. Justice Department official who specializes in foreign corrupt practices in Latin America. "The domestic impact is potentially very grave." No leader appears to be immune from the investigation in Latin America, which has long had a high tolerance for corruption. Related: Brazil's Olympic legacy? An abandoned Maracana stadium The difference this time around is two things: 1) the unprecedented size and scope of the case and 2) a key law passed in a few Latin American nations called "corporate liability." Corporate liability means it's easier for investigators to find a company guilty instead of its individual employees. That increases a firm's willingness to cooperate and play by the rules because the company's shareholders want to make sure they don't lose their money. Still, prosecutors face a tricky problem: They could risk jobs for thousands of workers if Odebrecht goes into bankruptcy due to a flood of fines, experts say. Related: Brazil judge overseeing corruption probe dies in plane crash It's not just its own employees. The company does business with many other firms across Latin America that depend on Odebrecht's business. With many countries' economies struggling to grow, especially Brazil with record-high unemployment, prosecutors' desire to protect workers could allow Odebrecht to survive. "No one wants Odebretch to go into bankruptcy...the government wants to preserve jobs," says Alexandre Garcia, associate director of Fitch Ratings in Brazil. "Does it survive? Well yes, it does. But survival doesn't mean that it won't come out of this smaller." CNNMoney (Buenos Aires ) First published April 5, 2017: 10:49 AM ET
1491403707	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/05/us/severe-weather/index.html	Southeast storms: Millions at risk of high winds, tornadoes and large hail - CNN.com	(CNN)A storm barreling toward the Southeastern United States is expected to leave nearly 55 million people at risk of tornadoes, damaging winds and thunderstorms Wednesday, according to a CNN forecast. A system of storms will affect Alabama, Georgia and South Carolina before moving into the Ohio and Tennessee valleys, according to the National Weather Service. The storms are expected to come in two waves: one in the morning, and another in the afternoon and evening. The National Weather Service issued a tornado watch for much of Alabama and Georgia, which means that conditions are favorable for severe weather. Strong winds and baseball-size hail are expected in parts of Alabama, where Gov. Robert Bentley declared a state of emergency ahead of the weather event. Jake Reed, a meteorologist for CNN affiliate WHNT-TV in Huntsville, Alabama, issued a stark warning of the coming storm on Facebook, saying it was "far and away the biggest threat Alabama has seen in quite some time." "The storms that form in the afternoon have the potential to pose a significant threat to life and property," he wrote. In Georgia, there's also a chance for isolated tornadoes and hail, National Weather Service meteorologist Matthew Sena told CNN. Due to the weather, the Federal Aviation Administration issued a ground stop for flights at Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport just after 9 a.m. Delays are expected as the storm hits the area. The weather system is also expected to bring heavy rains to the Interstate 20 corridor, including metro Atlanta, according to the National Weather Service. Rainfall amounts will average 1.5 to 2 inches, and a flash flood watch has been issued for that area, according to the weather service. The severe weather could last longer than Monday's storms and affect cities such as Atlanta and Augusta before it moves north by the end of the day, Sena said. At least five people died when a severe storm system swept through several Southern states over the weekend and Monday. CNN's Haley Brink contributed to this report. 
1491403607	http://money.cnn.com/2017/04/05/technology/facebook-revenge-porn/index.html	Facebook launches photo-matching tools to combat spread of revenge porn - Apr. 5, 2017	Her nude photos leaked online. Now she's fighting back Revenge porn is pervasive, and Facebook wants to do its part to stop it from spreading on its platforms. The term refers to non-consensual pornography that's distributed online to shame, exploit or extort its victims. And on Wednesday, the company said it would apply photo-matching to ensure intimate, nonconsensual images that are reported once aren't able to be uploaded again through Facebook's properties, including Messenger and Instagram. Facebook (FB, Tech30) said once an image is reported, it is reviewed by the company's community operations team and then photo-matching will be applied. From there, "if someone tries to share the image after it's been reported and removed, we will alert them that it violates our policies and that we have stopped their attempt to share it," Facebook head of global safety Antigone Davis said in a company blog post. A study from Data & Society Research Institute found that one in 25 people has been a victim of either threats, or actual posts, of revenge porn. The phenomenon is emotionally distressing, even resulting in some publicized suicides as a result of the shame and bullying that so often results. Facebook partnered up with the Cyber Civil Rights Initiative to develop its approach, as well as launched "Not Without My Consent," a guide to help people through the process. "We're very pleased about Facebook's announcement," Dr. Mary Anne Franks, Cyber Civil Rights Initiative's legislative and tech policy director, told CNNTech. "These new tools demonstrate Facebook's leadership and innovation in responding to abuses of technology." According to Franks, her relationship with the company dates back to 2014, when she was asked to give a presentation about nonconsensual pornoagraphy as part of the company's safety series. Facebook sponsored a cross-industry summit on the issue featuring presentations by CCRI in February 2015, Franks said. Related: The 20-year-old leading the March Against Revenge Porn "We have been working with Facebook on this issue ever since. In addition to helping them develop reporting and support procedures, we have been urging Facebook (and other companies) to move beyond purely reactive approaches to the problem and to adopt more preemptive measures, such as photo-matching," she said. There's currently no federal law against revenge porn. Thirty-five states and Washington, D.C., have enacted state laws against it, but online harassment laws (which include revenge porn) are notoriously weak and rarely match the damage revenge porn creates. For some victims, the only way to get their pictures off the internet has been to copyright their own naked bodies and sue on intellectual property grounds. The issue is one that's hit Facebook hard, in the form of a lawsuit. Facebook lost its bid in September to stop a lawsuit by a 14-year old girl whose naked photo appeared on its site. The girl is suing Facebook and the man who repeatedly posted her photo. At the time, Facebook did not comment on why this image -- once flagged -- wasn't caught by the PhotoDNA system, a tool used by a number of tech companies including Twitter (TWTR, Tech30) to detect and stop the spread of child porn. Related: Can a prenup for sex tapes keep you safe? The vast majority of revenge porn affects private citizens, but the issue has made headlines as celebrities have fallen victim as well. In August, hackers posted nude photos of comedian Leslie Jones on her web page, prompting federal authorities to investigate. Earlier this month, news surfaced that an ex-boyfriend of actress Mischa Barton was shopping around sexually explicit photos of her. Some lawmakers have pushed for reform, including Representative Jackie Speier, who proposed the Intimate Privacy Protection Act in July to criminalize revenge porn. CNNMoney (New York) First published April 5, 2017: 10:46 AM ET
1491403484	http://money.cnn.com/2017/04/05/news/economy/qatar-2022-budget-soccer/index.html	Qatar 2022 budget slashed by at least 40% - Apr. 5, 2017	Qatar 2022: 'Progress made on worker rights' Qatar has slashed its budget for hosting the 2022 soccer World Cup. Hassan Al Thawadi, the Qatari official charged with delivering the tournament, told CNNMoney the original budget had been reduced by between 40% and 50%. "We wanted to ensure there is financial responsibility in relation to the infrastructure relating to the World Cup," said Al Thawadi, secretary general of the Qatar 2022 supreme committee for delivery and legacy. Powered by SmartAsset.com SMARTASSET.COM "That's why we had set an initial budget early on and made a commitment towards reducing it as the market became clearer, as the project became clearer, as we define the scope." Thawadi's committee now expects tournament infrastructure will cost between $8 billion and $10 billion, with most of the money earmarked for stadiums and training grounds. Qatar, which had planned for 12 stadiums in its original bid, is now proposing eight -- the minimum required by FIFA. It is building seven new venues and upgrading an existing stadium. "Fifa has not yet agreed on the final number and we are in discussions with them to finalize the final number of stadiums that will fit the operating model of Qatar 2022," said Al Thawadi. "We are moving ahead with eight stadiums and in case discussions go on there might be an extra stadium to be developed," he added. An artist's impression of one of the new stadiums. Qatar is feeling the pinch financially due to a slump in world oil and gas prices. It has been reining in government spending in other areas, and along with other countries in the Gulf, will introduce a 5% sales tax in 2018. The gas-rich state is better protected than some of its neighbors thanks to its huge sovereign wealth fund. Al Thawadi said the reduction in the 2022 budget was not related to lower oil and gas revenues. Related: Qatar will invest another $6 billion in Britain "It's been a fiscal responsibility and not as a result of oil prices going down. It's a commitment we've made from day one," he said. Russia, which is hosting the 2018 tournament, has increased spending on the World Cup by $326 million, state media reported last month, bringing the cost of hosting that event to more than $10 billion. Still, that's $5 billion less than the cost of the 2014 World Cup in Brazil, and a fraction of the $50 billion Russia reportedly spent hosting the Sochi Winter Olympics. If FIFA accepts Qatar's proposal, the World Cup will be played in the fewest stadiums since Argentina hosted the tournament in 1978. Six stadiums were used then. Al Thawadi said construction work was well underway. "Plans are moving ahead pretty well. In terms of overall infrastructure as well... plans are going ahead on schedule." CNNMoney (Doha) First published April 5, 2017: 10:31 AM ET
1491403462	http://www.cnn.com/2017/02/16/health/malaria-zika-mosquito-bite-prevention/index.html	How soap, chairs and clothing could stop mosquito bites -- and disease - CNN.com	CNN Films' "Unseen Enemy," premieres Friday, April 7 at 9 p.m. ET/PT on CNN. (CNN)Known to health experts as the most deadly animal on the planet, the minuscule mosquito, with its dreaded whine, is responsible for millions of deaths from multiple diseases each year. In 2015, more than 210 million people had malaria, with an estimated 429,000 dying from the disease. That same year, more than 1.4 million people were thought to have chikungunya -- a debilitating disease causing fever and joint pain -- and each year, 390 million people are estimated to become infected with dengue, according to the World Health Organization. Yellow fever continues to cause outbreaks in Africa and South America, and 2015 saw an explosion of the Zika virus in 70 countries that had never experienced it before. These diverse, deadly diseases are all united by the way they are transmitted: the mosquito bite. "We need to kill mosquitoes," businessman and philanthropist Bill Gates told CNN during an exclusive interview. "So people have come along and given us ideas to (do) that." These people have come to him through the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, with ideas for everyday products that could be tweaked to cut down on the number of people bitten and infected each year. "Science today should give us tools to solve a lot of the big killers," Gates said. To date, mosquito control methods such as insecticide-treated bed nets and indoor spraying of insecticides in homes have been the driving force behind falling infection rates, specifically in efforts to control malaria. These nets are credited with nearly 70% of malaria cases prevented since 2000. But despite this progress, the disease continues to kill, and experts believe creative ideas are needed to help those who remain unprotected -- especially when they're away from home. It's all around you "What's going to happen is that you have round-the-clock protection," said Fredros Okumu, director of science at the Ifakara Health Institute in Tanzania, where more than 4 million cases of malaria were reported in 2015. "Repellent can be fitted on your wall ... on a floor mat ... their chair ... sandals." Okumu's team is making this wide range of goods mosquito-free by fitting them with a bespoke fabric coated with mosquito repellent and targeting objects people can't live without, making their use inherent. The repellents are volatile in nature, meaning they easily evaporate and can be detected from greater distances than ones that typically sit on your skin. Prototypes of the fabric on a chair have shown protection for up to six months, according to Okumu. But the strategy gets more complex. Rather than simply divert the mosquitoes onto someone else's skin, Okumu wants to capture them using a mosquito landing box, which mimics human odor to lure the bugs. "We're able to capture them," he said. "And this way, we are providing protection to whoever is using this facility ... (and) communal protection to everyone else." So far, most attention has been given to the chair, on which Velcro is used to attach repellent fabric to the underside, providing protection while avoiding direct contact with a user's skin -- an important point given the strength of the insecticides. But Okumu believes that other furnishings and everyday items, such as footwear, can incorporate this material and enable people to be protected wherever they go -- and easily. "People might be very poor ... but one thing that is almost universal is that they always wear some form of footwear," he said, adding that this can ensure maximum compliance. "This is part of our evolution." When it comes to disease control, however, human behavior is a major barrier. "The issue is whether people will use it or buy it," said Flaminia Catteruccia, assistant professor of immunology and infectious disease at the Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health. "Something for long-term use has to also be thoroughly tested" for side effects. Would you use the chair or wear the sandals? Okumu believes you would. "The fight against malaria is so difficult, we'll need all tools," Catteruccia added. "It's important to explore methods ... at the community or village level, these may be effective." Among those exploring multiple approaches to mosquito control are students in the graduate program and researchers at the Johns Hopkins Center for Bioengineering Innovation and Design. During a "Zika hackathon" competition last year, they were challenged to come up with creative ways to fight the Zika epidemic, with a focus on the mosquitoes spreading the virus. "For a large part of the planet, mosquito disease remains a huge problem," said Dr. Soumyadipta Acharya, director of the Johns Hopkins graduate program. "New thinking is needed from various angles." A key area given attention was catching people during their daily activities -- such as washing. It's in your soap In contrast to long-lasting, volatile insecticides that could harm your skin, an opposite group of compounds is shorter-lived and residual, meaning they can comfortably reside on your skin. Acharya's team is trying one of these, permethrin, in soap. "There are different insecticides for different uses," he said. "(This one) stays behind on the skin, as all soaps do as well." The teams at Johns Hopkins are not the first to develop anti-mosquito soaps. Last year, another repellent-based product -- known as Faso soap -- began development in Burkina Faso after the researchers behind it won the Global Social Venture Competition at the University of California, Berkeley and received funding to develop it further. But both versions are still in early development and face multiple challenges before being allowed onto the market. "There are many tests needed to evaluate the safety and efficacy," Acharya said, adding that teams also need to figure out how long a soap's effects last: It should be at least 24 hours, before a person would wash again. Catteruccia added that soap will provide very personal protection and not have "benefits at the community level," she said. "Mosquitoes are also highly resilient, so they will always be able to get round this." Insecticide resistance has been a challenge for health teams around the world. According to the World Health Organization, 60 of 96 countries where malaria is endemic have reported resistance since 2010. But Acharya is hopeful that a soap, if proven effective, could be used along with other approaches to help protect people wherever they go. His teams are also working on banners to be hung near homes that emit repellents, as well as traps with real-time sensors to monitor mosquito numbers in a community and alert residents to protect themselves when spikes occur. The traps were piloted in Brazil earlier this year. "It's going to be a multipronged approach," Acharya said, highlighting that soaps, sprays, banners, traps and more can work together to keep mosquitoes at arm's length. "Together, your odds of getting bitten are reduced." It's in your clothes and accessories "Wearable technology can protect against mosquito bites during the day," said James Logan, senior lecturer in medical entomology at the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine. Logan is also working on technologies to protect people through the clothes they wear and the accessories and furniture they own. His approach with clothing is two-pronged: impregnating the clothes themselves and also the detergents they're washed with. By also incorporating insecticides into plastics, he hopes to extend protection to hats, handbags and household items. "It's about what people will accept," said Logan, whose teams regularly speak to people in affected communities to learn which products they're most likely to use. One prototype recently trialed in Thailand was a school uniform laced with the insecticide permethrin to prevent infections from dengue. More than 1,800 students were enrolled from 10 schools, with five schools using the new product and the other five monitored as a control group. The number of mosquitoes caught inside classrooms of students wearing the treated uniforms was significantly reduced in the month after their introduction. The challenge, however, was making the effect last. The uniforms' ability to knock down mosquitoes fell dramatically after four washes. "That study was encouraging," said Logan, who is preparing prototypes of a wider range of products: general clothing, footwear, jewelry and detergents. "It's important you target your demographic," he added. "And we need to understand the diversity of everyday lives." His team are now also developing more natural repellants, based on human odor, to incorporate into their product range. By creating diverse good for people to choose from, Logan hopes these protective products will be "relevant anywhere in the world," to overcome the barrier of human compliance. "It's always going to be a combination of different interventions taken to communities," he said. "Wearable technologies won't eliminate malaria on their own, but they will help."  
1491407820	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/05/politics/jeff-merkley-neil-gorsuch-talk-a-thon/index.html	Jeff Merkley ends 15-hour talk-a-thon against Neil Gorsuch - CNNPolitics.com	Washington (CNN)Sen. Jeff Merkley spoke for more than 15 hours from the Senate floor, laying out his arguments overnight against Neil Gorsuch ahead of a tense showdown over President Donald Trump's Supreme Court nominee at the end of the week. The Oregon Democrat's marathon -- with a brief assist from Sen. Dick Durbin of Illinois early Wednesday morning — wrapped up shortly after 10 a.m. ET. "I was hoping the message would reach a few hearts across the aisle that we're on a path we have not completed -- the seat has not been stolen, we're potentially a couple of days away from that," Merkley told reporters after he left the Senate floor. Following his extended remarks, one reporter asked him which was harder: the talk-a-thon or the recent Ironman triathlon that Merkley completed. "That's a good question," he said. "I tell you my feet really hurt standing in one place so this was more uncomfortable than the Ironman." His talk-a-thon does nothing to stall a vote on Gorsuch because Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell had already taken the procedural step to lock in a time to vote to end debate over Gorsuch. While Democrats have enough votes to carry out a true filibuster that actually would delay a vote, McConnell said Wednesday that Republicans, who hold a 52-48 majority, have enough votes to overcome that filibuster if they use the nuclear option and move to a final confirmation vote Friday. RELATED: McConnell starts clock on Neil Gorsuch nuclear showdown Merkley was one of the first Democrats earlier this year to pledge that his party would mount the filibuster, meaning he was confident they could get the 41 votes needed to sustain it. No regrets for 2013 change He was also an advocate for the use of the nuclear option by Democrats in 2013 when their party was in the majority and Republicans objected to some executive branch nominees and judicial nominations. Republicans are now citing that rule change as a precedent for their potential use of it later this week. Merkley, however, said he had no regrets in pushing for the nuclear option nearly four years ago. "That setting was one where we labored for the better part of year working with our Republican colleagues saying what you're doing in blocking all these executive nominees, all these judicial nominees. ... We can't have a situation where the filibuster is used to prevent the administration from fundamentally working," he said. "So we did the right thing." Garland nomination blocked On the floor, Merkley has argued that Gorsuch is not a mainstream nominee and blasted Republicans for blocking consideration of President Barack Obama's nominee of Merrick Garland last year. "For the first time in US history, a seat has been stolen from one president and delivered to another in a court packing scheme," Merkley said around 4 a.m. ET. "And if that were to succeed, it would set a precedent that will haunt the court for decades to come. And it will haunt this body, the Senate, because if a theft succeeds then it changes the analysis of every future Supreme Court vacancy." He and other Democrats have also focused on individual cases in which they felt Gorsuch was unfair to the "little guy" and sided too often with government or corporations. Republicans, hitting back against the argument that he's extreme, say Gorsuch sided with the majority in 99% of his opinions as a federal judge in the past decade, and the GOP said that of the 2,700 cases he has ruled on, 97% were decided unanimously. Merkley made his closing argument shortly after 10 a.m. ET, also calling for the investigations into Trump's campaign ties to Russia to conclude before Gorsuch is further considered. Following his remarks, Merkley went directly to the restroom. He gave the thumbs up to reporters after CNN asked how the senator was doing. RELATED: Supreme Court justices await Senate nuclear option  
1491407815	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/04/travel/jessamyn-stanley-durham-nc-one-perfect-day/index.html	A local's guide to what's new and cool in Durham, NC - CNN.com	Durham, NC (CNN)Yoga teacher Jessamyn Stanley hasn't been seated more than a couple minutes at her favorite new restaurant, Palace International, when two women eating lunch nearby recognize her. "Oh, are you the one that does yoga?" asks the first woman, smiling nervously. "I follow you!" "Yes, hi," replies Stanley, squirming a little at the attention. The woman continues to praise Stanley, telling her that Stanley's Instagram posts have helped give larger women a positive body image. People recognize Stanley whenever she's home in Durham, North Carolina -- not just for her hardcore yoga classes, but because of her social media presence. Using her Instagram and YouTube accounts, she advocates yoga for everyone, busting through the yoga stereotype of the slim, white, heterosexual woman who can afford group classes and pretty props. A native of nearby Greensboro, Stanley was unhappily attending graduate school in Winston-Salem when she turned to yoga to find some relief. She had tried it before but this time, it took. Yoga gave her the courage to leave her program and move to Durham five years ago, with no job or friends to speak of. After she moved, she was reeling from the loss of a seven-year relationship and the death of her aunt, and yoga became her saving grace. And her first job at Mateo, Durham restaurateur Matt Kelly's highly-regarded downtown tapas restaurant, gave Stanley a front row seat to the redevelopment of the Bull City, so called after the Bull Durham Tobacco brand launched by the Blackwell Tobacco Company in the 1800s. From tobacco central to smaller makers Once home to a bustling tobacco industry and a four-block "Black Wall Street" area of African-American-owned financial enterprises, Durham had become a place in the late 1980s where the mostly white, middle classes from nearby Raleigh and Chapel Hill would not go after dark. Now the city is bustling with new hotels, farm-to-table restaurants, a busy and engaged farmers' market (even in winter), a food truck scene, ethically sourced coffee shops and storefronts selling locally made foods and home goods. Some of that is thanks to the health care and life sciences industries, Duke University and Counter Culture Coffee, which is headquartered in Durham and has a roasting facility, training center and Friday open tastings here. But much credit also goes to the hustle of independent artists and entrepreneurs, including Stanley and her friends, who moved into the city and made it their home. Getting priced out of the city Stanley loves is a possibility she and her friends debate endlessly, fighting for a city living wage and gender identity/LGBTQ protections, even as they recommend their favorite places for visitors to check out. Any newbie to the Bull City may want to pop into Duke Gardens, the new Durham Bulls baseball park, the American Tobacco Historic District, Dame's Chicken & Waffles and The Pit's Durham location -- pick your meat and sauce -- to get a sense of place. Stanley does occasionally eat at the Pit and do yoga at Duke Gardens, but some of her favorite spots are mostly known by the locals who live and breathe Durham. Before Stanley heads out on tour for her new book, "Every Body Yoga," which releases April 4, she took CNN to visit some of those spots around Durham on a rare day off. Wake up with sustainable coffee After waking up and doing some morning yoga, Stanley first heads to Cocoa Cinnamon, which is owned by husband-and-wife team Areli and Leon Barrera de Grodski. Cocoa Cinnamon's first location sits on a corner in Durham's Central Park neighborhood, filled with regulars drinking Counter Culture coffee and specialty drinks as they work at the collection of tables. The most popular is the Dr. Durham, says the barista, which consists of a latte with slightly frothier microfoam with homemade vanilla topped with maca root powder, ginger root powder and black lava salt. "Did you enjoy your trip?" Stanley asks Areli Barrera de Grodski, who's behind the counter today, as she orders her favorite Moctezuma, a latte with dulce de leche and cayenne pepper. "Yeah, I got to visit the southern part of Peru, went to Machu Picchu and realized that it's like all about astrology," Areli replies. The coffee shop, which started as a mobile bike (not a truck) and opened this storefront in 2013, now has two locations and is building a third. The couple have built their business on sourcing many of its ingredients locally and its coffee sustainably, and paying workers a living wage. Cocoa Cinnamon, 420 West Geer Street, Durham, NC, 27701 Buying locally, supporting friends Located around the corner from Cocoa Cinnamon, the newly named Mothership houses Stanley's work space -- along with lots of other solo entrepreneurs spread out among the various desks and sofas collected over the years. The Mothership also has a store/art space, which is Stanley's favorite spot for finding art and other goods by North Carolina-based makers, some of whom are her friends and yoga students. "It's an awesome place to get local Durham stuff," she says. "Not only does it support different artists and makers who are in this area, but (the shop was) also created by people who are themselves makers and creators." Among her favorites are Evan McIntyre's art, RIVTAK clothing and accessories, Big Spoon Roasters and The Zen Succulent, which also has a shop downtown. And when she hits a wall creatively, wandering through the Mothership store can inspire her creativity. "If I looked at only yoga things all the time, I would never come up with any new ideas," she says. "It's really important to be looking at and appreciating every kind of expression." The Mothership, 401 West Geer Street, Durham NC, 27701; +1 919-381-6306 The Zen Succulent, 125 E Parrish Street, Suite 100 A, Durham, NC 27701; +1 919-480-1762 Lunch can be more than barbecue Just a five-minute drive from downtown, Palace International, which specializes in Kenyan and East African cuisine, is Stanley's latest favorite go-to spot. It's where she can easily bump into friends and fans who also love the chicken karanga, curry goat, lentils, samosas (which came to Kenya via Indian immigrants) and other African food served by Caren and Maurice Ochola and their grown children, Moses Ochola and Suzanna Ochola-Love. Joined by friend and local bartender Lisa Williams, who she met while the two were working at Mateo tapas bar, Stanley raves about the food. "How has there been this amazing African food right under my nose and I didn't even know?" she says. "These oxtails are insane. The chicken is insane." "As a person who did not really grow up eating traditional African cuisine, even being African-American, it is awesome to have it within arm's reach and that it's so good," she says. Asked by Stanley if any of the food is Americanized, Suzanna Ochola-Love laughs and says no. "I promise you, you can fly to Kenya right now, take a bus into Kisumu and you will get food just like this." Palace International, 1104 A Broad St Durham, NC 27705; +1 919-416-4922 Stop by the farmers' market Located under the Pavilion at Central Park, the Durham Farmers' Market is open year-round -- although there's more variety and longer hours when it's not winter. Stanley recommends the flowers at Bluebird Meadows and whatever's for sale at Tiny Farm and Funny Girl Farm. There are often food trucks right across the street, along with art for sale -- all organized by the Art Market at Vega Metals, a cooperative artist collaboration featuring metal artwork. A recent Saturday had abortion rights activists selling baked goods. "I love the farmers' market because it's a perfect representation of the entrepreneurial spirit that truly unites Durham. I always leave feeling a stronger connection to my city," Stanley says. Aren't visiting during its operating hours? Head to Bulldega, the downtown market that features many locally grown and produced products, including Funny Girl Farm, Big Spoon Roasters and a living herb wall. Durham Farmers' Market, the Pavilion at Durham Central Park, 501 Foster Street, Durham, NC 27701 Bulldega Urban Market, 104 City Hall Plaza, Ste 100,Durham, NC 27701; +1 919-680-4682 Time for ice cream, locally made A local favorite for fabulous ice cream, The Parlour was launched as a food truck in May of 2011. Using crowdfunding to pay for some of their kitchen equipment, owners Yoni and Vanessa Mazuz opened a brick and mortar store in April 2013 focusing on interesting and local ingredients. Coconut curry with candied cashews, orange blossom with candied ginger, sweet corn with black raspberry and coriander goat cheese with strawberry swirl are currently on the menu. "It is a symbol of how entrepreneurship blooms in the city and the product is amazing," says Stanley, who often stops by to see her friend Bahar Karkuki, the shop's general manger. "Any time that they can, they source local ingredients. " Dashi, Dos Perros, Alley 26, Rue Cler and other restaurants serve their ice cream, which is often made to fit their cuisine: Dashi, a ramen shop, serves its green tea ice cream. Need a slice of pie to go with that scoop? Scratch, operated by James Beard semi-finalist Phoebe Lawless, is just a couple blocks away (and a second location is in the works). The Parlour has hosted events with the East Durham Pie Company on Pi Day (March 14) to serve pie with its ice cream. The pie company plans to open a storefront this year. The Parlour, 117 Market Street, Durham, NC 27701; +1 919-564-7999 Scratch, 111 Orange Street, Durham, NC 27701; +1 919-956-5200 Dinnertime at Durham's hottest new restaurants Dinnertime in Durham creates some hard decisions. Downtown, chef Michael Lee operates M Sushi (focused on seafood) and M Kokko (focused on chicken) from the same kitchen. Look for the unmarked separate entrance to write your name on the M Kokko waiting list. He plans to open M Kogi to serve Korean barbeque and M Taco in the same neighborhood in early 2018.  Then there's Dashi, which is owned by husband-and-wife teams Nick Hawthorne-Johnson and Rochelle Johnson and Billy and Kelly Cotter. The Johnsons also own the Ponysaurus Brewing Company and the Cookery, a commercial space that has launched many a food truck. The Cotters' other venture is Toast, an Italian sandwich spot. On a late weekend night, however, Stanley returns to her Durham roots with restauranteur Matt Kelly's refined but warm Italian venture, Mothers and Sons, to celebrate the birthday of her partner Kori Higgs. Kelly already runs the successful Mateo, Vin Rouge, the New York-style Lucky's Deli with Drew Brown and is planning to open his newest spot, Saint James, to focus on seafood. "Mothers and Sons is a collaboration between Matt and his former chef de cuisine at Mateo Tapas, Josh DeCarolis, and Josh is like behind the helm at Mothers & Sons making the most amazing Italian food," says Stanley. "You cannot understand this pasta that Josh literally makes every day, rolls it out on the big table in there. He does it the way that he learned it in Italy from his people, and he really shares that with the people who come into the restaurant, and it's amazing." Mothers and Sons Trattoria, 107 West Chapel Hill Street, Durham, NC 27701; +1 919-294-8247 M Sushi/M Kokko, 311 Holland Street, Durham,NC 27701; +1 919-908-9266 Dashi, 415 E Chapel Hill St, Durham, NC 27701; +1 919-251-9335 After hours in Durham After finishing up at Mothers and Sons, Stanley and her posse head to the Atomic Fern social club to keep the celebration going. Durham is a small town, so the non-university nightlife isn't as extensive as in larger cities, but Stanley tends to find the fun spots and know the people who run them. On any given weekend, Stanley might head to the Atomic Fern (open until 2 a.m.), hear live music at the Pinhook (closes anywhere from midnight to 2 a.m.), hear jazz at Beyu Caffé (hours vary) or to Cosmic Cantina (closes at 4 a.m.) for its late-night scene. "Cosmic Cantina is one of the only restaurants in Durham that's open really late," she says. "You always ran into the most random people there at 3 o'clock in the morning. It's like the line will be out the door and you'll run into literally everybody at Cosmic." Atomic Fern, 108 East Parrish St, Durham, NC 27701; +1 919-908-8662 The Pinhook, 117 W Main St, Durham, NC 27701; +1 984-244-7243 Where to rest your head Durham has a hopping hotel scene that's worth exploring. The Durham, a one-time bank transformed into a boutique downtown 53-room hotel, hosts an all-day coffee bar in its lobby, and best of all, has beans ground fresh for every guest to make coffee in their own room every morning -- included in the room price. James Beard Award-winning Andrea Reusing runs the kitchen -- including room service and the rooftop bar, where locals head to watch the sunset. There is also a house-made coffee soda at the lobby coffee bar worth a visit, even for people not staying at the hotel. The city is also home to an outpost of the hip 21c chain, where the Art Deco Hill Building has been transformed into a 125-room hotel with an art exhibition space. Chef Thomas Card runs the kitchen at Counting House, the hotel's seafood-focused restaurant and bar. The art space is open to the public and guided tours are available Wednesday and Friday at 5 p.m. Even the original bank vault has been transformed into an art space. A mid-century motor lodge currently under renovation, the Unscripted Hotel Durham is scheduled to open in April across the street from the Durham. It will feature a diner, a pool deck and a pay-by-the-ounce taproom. The Durham Hotel, 315 E Chapel Hill St, Durham, NC 27701; 919-768-8830; Nightly rates start at $199 21c Museum Hotel Durham, 111 North Corcoran Street, Durham, North Carolina 27701; +1 919-956-6700; Nightly rates start at at $199 (weeknights) and $229 (weekends) Unscripted Hotel, 212 North Corcoran St, Durham, NC 27701; Opening April 2017, Nightly rates start at $169  
1491407767	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/05/politics/kelly-testimony-senate-homeland-border-security-wall/index.html	Kelly: No border wall 'from sea to shining sea' - CNNPolitics.com	Washington (CNN)Homeland Security Secretary John Kelly said Wednesday it is "unlikely" that the Trump administration will build a full wall along the entire Southern border, despite President Donald Trump's consistent promises to that effect. "It is unlikely that we will build a wall, a physical barrier, from sea to shining sea," Kelly told the Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Committee Wednesday morning. Kelly did say it is still "very likely" that more border barriers will be built, but that they will be strategic. "Physical barriers work," Kelly said. Committee Chairman Ron Johnson and top Democrat on the committee Sen. Claire McCaskill both noted that the agents on the border say they would prefer fencing -- so that they can see what's happening on the other side of the border. "Is the President OK with fencing instead of the wall?" McCaskill asked Kelly. "The President has told me, 'Kelly, go do it. We need to protect the Southern border in any way that makes sense,'" Kelly said. "The President knows that I'm looking at variations on the theme, and I have no doubt that when I go back to him and say, 'Wall makes sense here, high-tech fencing makes sense over here, technology makes sense over here,' I have no doubt he'll tell me to go do it," he added. McCaskill praised Kelly's response -- and called it "embarrassing" that Trump won't admit his promise isn't doable. She added that members of Congress almost uniformly rejects the idea of a 2,000-mile concrete wall and won't appropriate funds for it and asked Kelly to "speak truth to power in that regard." "As soon as we (can) stop this, 'from sea to shining sea we're going to build a wall and the Mexicans are going to pay for it' -- it's embarrassing," McCaskill said. "Everyone in Congress knows it's not going to happen. ... It appears the only person who won't say it out loud is the President." In his written testimony submitted to the committee, Kelly said the money requested by the administration would go toward a variety of investments, including technology and fencing. Border apprehensions drop Also in the hearing, Kelly touted an "absolutely amazing" drop in the number of apprehensions at the Southern border on Wednesday as evidence that Trump's executive orders are already working. As CNN first reported Tuesday, the number of apprehensions at the Southwest border dropped by 35% in March from the month before, the second month in a row that apprehensions dropped substantially. In both February and March, the drop in apprehensions defied a 17-year trend. Going back to 2000, according to Customs and Border Patrol data, apprehensions have increased every February and every March. Kelly touted the numbers as an example of the effectiveness of Trump's early policies and executive orders on immigration enforcement already having an effect. He noted that the drop in apprehensions includes a "dramatic reduction" in the number of families and minors making the trip -- a key focus of Kelly's as he emphasizes how dangerous and predatory the smuggling pathways that bring undocumented immigrants to the US are. CNN's Laura Jarrett and Mary Kay Mallonee contributed to this report. 
1491408605	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/02/health/unseen-enemy-deadly-influenza-epidemic-gwen-zwanziger/index.html	How my daughter died from a simple case of flu - CNN.com	Gwen and Terry Zwanziger's 17-year-old daughter Shannon died unexpectedly in 2014 after losing a battle with influenza. Their story is included in CNN Films' "Unseen Enemy," premiering Friday, April 7 at 9 p.m. ET/PT on CNN. Owatonna, Minnesota (CNN)It's Day 836. I've cried more times today than I can count. You'd think by now, I could go days without crying, but I can't get over the guilt. Shannon's only complaint was a sore throat. Her fever wasn't even scary.  I spent (wasted is a better word) most of my morning Googling flu information again today. The complex science of mutating viruses leaves me boggled. If I can't make sense of it, how can I explain the importance of stopping the flu to others? After more than two years, my husband Terry and I haven't said the "D" word yet. We say "she went to heaven." We say "she left." Although I have said, "she died" several times, we somehow can't say the words "Shannon is d..."  No dreams of Shannon last night. I want to see you again so bad. If I could just talk to her one last time. Tell her how sorry I am. Does she know? Can she see from heaven? I have mixed feelings about how things work up there, I just know they do. Going through some books, I came across one of her homemade bookmarks she made, when she was little. I got a card from the donation center. They're doing a curb pick up next week for "gently used clothing." I can't do it yet.  There are pieces she hardly wore -- her new clothes for senior year -- that she only just began to wear. So yeah, they're gently used. Just barely used.  Flu Moms Day 837 is turning out to be an especially bad one. This is the kind of day I should go on Facebook and talk to the other mothers on our private page called "Flu Moms." Last time I got on, I noticed a couple of new names. Clearly children are still dying. I thank God for this group of moms. We can vent and encourage depending on our own mood -- a safe place to share how we feel and how we cope. Some of the mothers have developed nonprofits to honor their little ones. They plant municipal flowerbeds and organize 5k runs to raise money for awareness. God bless their efforts. 'Let it run its course' The seasonal flu kills healthy, active, precious kids every year. Shannon went to school on a Wednesday, came home like always, but said a friend "gave" her the flu. I sent her up to her room and began the same things any parent would do.  I brought her liquids, applesauce, and soup. She complained of a sore throat, so her dad brought home throat spray, Tylenol, throat lozenges, and a little gift. She developed a fever, but not so high to take her to the ER. Later that week, I thought she ought to be feeling better, so I wondered if she was taking advantage of days off of school and being waited on. I'd go into her room and her eyes would be closed. I couldn't tell if she was faking or not. I took her cell phone and tucked it under the clean laundry I'd put on her dresser for her to put away. Next time I went in, she had the phone back, so I knew she was OK. By Sunday, she just seemed weak. She was texting and watching TV, but she wasn't eating good and she seemed lethargic. So I sent her to the clinic with her dad, with a little journal of her temperature readings, liquid intake and even her O2 sats. I didn't go with them because I wanted to clean her room and change her sheets. All nice and fresh for her, you know? Terry sent me a picture of Shannon sitting in a wheelchair with a mask on, leaning her head on his shoulder. That's the last picture we have of her.  When they returned home, she walked in through the back door and said the visit to the doctor was a waste of time. The doctor just said it was the flu and to "let it run its course." The doctor didn't have a lot of time to spend with her, because the waiting room was packed with people who seemed to have the flu also. Her high school had something like 150 kids who were out of school with it. Thirty-four hours later, Shannon came downstairs. When she went into the bathroom, she tapped on the shower curtain, so I helped her into the tub. By this time I was sweating with fear. I hadn't helped her with a bath since she was little. Something was horribly wrong. When she leaned back in the tub and I saw her eyes, I knew she was dying. I got behind her and lifted her out. I sat on the toilet with her sitting on my lap and she died. There was nothing that could be done to save her. Health care professionals — from ambulance EMTs to the mighty Mayo Clinic — couldn't bring her back to me. The flu destroyed her organs. She didn't even know it. 'What if' Shannon chose not to get vaccinated. I wish she had. If I had pushed her into getting a flu shot, then I wouldn't have the guilt about "what if." What if the vaccine had given her a little extra control over the invasion? That's what the vaccine should do. While you can still get the flu even if you've had a flu shot, it can reduce the risk of serious illness and complications. Please take the flu seriously. Keep your loved ones home if you even think they might be sick. Or else you might live wondering if a classmate died because your child brought that strain into the classroom.  Talk openly about the flu. Make people around you aware that the flu is deadly. Talk to every leader you can.  Companies need to be more understanding about passing the flu around the work place and letting people stay home. Our government needs to hear from us. They need to be more transparent, honest and forthcoming about the seriousness. We need to get our scientists to find a universal flu vaccine. There are research efforts underway working on this. Instead of guessing in the spring which strains to put into the vaccine, they need a vaccine that will nip it in its core. Please take action. If we do nothing, then we are all to blame. And believe me, guilt will change your life. I was just a regular mom of a regular kid. Now I'm a shell of the person I was. And the world will never see what Shannon could have become.  
1491408544	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/03/health/pandemic-risk-virus-bacteria/index.html	Global pandemics: 7 reasons we're more at risk - CNN.com	(CNN)It could take just one cough, one kiss, one touch or even one bite to change not only your life, but the lives of everyone around you -- and for months or even years. In most cases, the closer those people are to you, the greater the risk. But it isn't always that simple. The risk at hand: an infectious outbreak. Public health experts believe we are at greater risk than ever of experiencing large-scale outbreaks and global pandemics like those we've seen before: SARS, swine flu, Ebola and Zika. More than 28,000 people were infected during the 2014-16 Ebola epidemic, with over 11,000 deaths. And as of March 10, 84 countries have reported Zika transmission. That disease was discovered in the 1940s, but had its first outbreak in 2007 in Micronesia, and more recently began spreading toward the end of 2015. Every time, the infection's arrival is unexpected and its scale unprecedented, leaving the world vulnerable. Experts are unanimous in the belief that the next outbreak contender will most likely be a surprise -- and we need to be ready. "We're only as secure in the world as the weakest country," said Jimmy Whitworth, professor of international public health at the London School of Hygiene & Tropical Medicine. With so many health systems and economies in a fragile state, this means we are far from secure. "Infectious diseases respect no boundaries," he said. The World Health Organization is alerted to hundreds of small outbreaks every month, he noted, which it investigates and uses to predict the chances of a bigger problem. "There are little clusters of outbreaks occurring all the time, all over the place," Whitworth said. But with infections disregarding borders and their battle lines against humans drawn, he believes the way we live today is what opens us up to risk. "(Many) aspects of modern life put us at more risk. We are more ready than before," he points out, highlighting the International Health Regulations Global Outbreak Alert and Response Network and countries with national rapid response teams -- such as the United States, UK and China -- ready to tackle any emergency. "But the stakes keep getting raised," he said. Here's why. 1. Growing populations and urbanization The facts around urban living are simple: You live, eat, work and move closer to people than in any rural setting, and with this comes greater opportunity for disease to spread through air, mosquitoes or unclean water. As populations grow, so will the number of city-dwellers, with the United Nations predicting that 66% of the global population will live in urban areas by 2050. More people in cities can "put a strain on sanitation," said David Heymann, head of the Centre for Global Health Security at the think tank Chatham House. Beyond people's close proximity, "this is a second source of infection," he said, and a third is increased food demand, causing farmers to grow more food, with more animals, making them likely to live closer to those animals as well. Animals are reservoirs for many diseases, including cattle for tuberculosis and African sleeping sickness (trypanosomiasis) and poultry for avian flu. With people moving more regularly from -- and between -- rural settings to urban ones, the chances of them becoming infected and then living in close quarters with others further boosts the potential for things to spread. 2. Encroaching into new environments As numbers of people grow, so does the amount of land needed to house them. Populations expand into previously uninhabited territories, such as forests. With new territories comes contact with new animals and, inevitably, new infections. For one example, "Lassa fever occurs because people live in the forest and destroy it for farming," Heymann said. Lassa fever is a viral disease spread by contact with the feces of infected rodents. It can cause fever and hemorrhaging of various parts of the body, including the eyes and nose. Person-to-person transmission is also possible, albeit less common. Outbreaks generally occur in West Africa, with higher than expected rates in Nigeria since 2016. Heymann explains that Lassa is one example of people living near forest environments where infected rodents reside, but destruction of those forests for agriculture leaves the animals nowhere to go -- other than humans' homes. "The rodents that live there can't get food and go into human areas for food," he said. 3. Climate change Evidence continues to emerge that climate change is resulting in greater numbers of heat waves and flooding events, bringing more opportunity for waterborne diseases such as cholera and for disease vectors such as mosquitoes in new regions. "Flooding is occurring with increased frequency," Heymann said, and with that comes greater risk of outbreaks. Between 2030 and 2050, climate change is projected to cause about 250,000 additional deaths per year from heat stress, malnutrition and the spread of infectious diseases like malaria, according to the World Health Organization. With disease carriers like mosquitoes increasingly able to live in new unprotected territory, the risk of an outbreak is high. Whitworth cited the current yellow fever outbreak in Angola, which has infected more than 350 people. He explained that as workers from China returned home from Angola, any yellow fever infection could have been transmitted by mosquitoes in China. But, the workers' return in winter meant the insects weren't around to transmit through bites. 4. Global travel "We're vulnerable because of increased travel," Whitworth said. International tourist arrivals reached a record of almost 1.2 billion in 2015, according to the UN World Tourism Organization, 50 million more than 2014. It was the sixth consecutive year of above-average growth. And with greater numbers moving at all times come greater options for infections to hop a ride. "Infectious agents travel around in humans many times within their incubation period," Heymann said. An incubation period is the time between infection and the onset of symptoms, meaning people can transmit an infection though they won't appear to be sick. The SARS (severe acute respiratory syndrome) pandemic of 2003 is thought to have begun with Dr. Liu Jianlun, who developed symptoms of the airborne virus on a trip to Huang Xingchu in China and then went to visit family in Hong Kong. He infected people at his hotel and his family. He was then hospitalized and died, as did one of his relatives. In less than four months, about 4,000 cases and 550 deaths from SARS could be traced to Liu's stay in Hong Kong. More than 8,000 other people became infected across more than 30 countries worldwide. But Heymann stresses that "it's not just humans" who spread disease through travel. Infections spread through insects, food and animals moved between countries. "It's also trade," he said, pointing to airport malaria, in which people in airports have become infected with malaria through mosquitoes that have hitched a ride on a plane or in food. He also described bird flu that was stopped at the Belgian border in Thai eagles being traded as pets in 2004. Guinea rats shipped as pets in the United States in 2003 harbored infections with monkey pox, he noted, which then entered prairie dogs and eventually humans. 5. Civil conflict "If a health system cannot handle (an outbreak), there's pandemonium," Heymann said. He believes that poor hygiene is not a valid excuse anywhere, even in developing settings, as sterilization and hand-washing are straightforward. But if a country is on the brink of breakdown from civil unrest, the ability to handle an intense and sudden problem like an outbreak could bring its people to their knees -- and allow the infection to flourish. "Outbreaks can completely paralyze countries," said Whitworth, citing the 2014 Ebola epidemic in which Sierra Leone, Guinea and Liberia were "quite close to collapsing." Civil unrest had plagued all three countries, leaving their economic and health infrastructures in dire need of rebuilding -- and ill-prepared for a major infection to strike. That problem combined with human movement between these three countries and others more globally meant Ebola was able to spread, even though dozens of infections in previous years in nearby Democratic Republic of Congo were self-contained and often resolved themselves. "If (an infection) stays local, it burns out," Heymann said. "People learn what to do." 6. Fewer doctors and nurses in outbreak regions Beyond weak health systems, countries where outbreaks are more likely to occur -- namely, more developing settings -- also have fewer doctors and nurses to treat the population. Most have left for better prospects elsewhere. "We have to deal with that as a reality," Heymann said, adding that some countries even encourage young medical talent to travel to new regions. "It's difficult to manage health worker migration," he said. But programs and strategies are underway to tackle this by "task-shifting," moving responsibilities to new groups and training them to deliver care, such as community health workers. "Communities have to be resilient," he said, and assigning tasks to people at all levels could mean a greater team available when a new infection strikes. 7. Faster information In the information age, new levels of communication bring even newer levels of fear and multiple ways to spread it, experts believe. Although the majority of small outbreaks may once have gone largely unknown by populations farther from the epicenter, people today are more informed than ever and require transparent, factual information to be fast-flowing. Google has been been using searches for symptoms to help identify when an outbreak may occur, such as with the flu. "The world looks for an authority," said Heymann, who believes the WHO adopts that role but needs to be faster and more transparent with information. The organization was criticized for being too slow to respond and unprepared for the 2014 Ebola outbreak. "But social media has become active ... and that's an area that's difficult to control," he said. The posting and shaping of information by multiple people can change messaging and what people read and believe, Heymann added. It may not all be bad, he said, but the point is that it can shape the way information travels, potentially inciting fear and stigma. "Not all information on the internet or social media is accurate," said Mark Feinberg, chairman of the scientific advisory committee of the recently launched Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness Innovations. "Ensuring accurate communication to the public is critically important." The coalition, launched in January, will address the surprise nature of outbreaks and epidemics to try to prevent them, rather than respond to them. Lining up the elements Heymann describes the likelihood of a new infection spreading rapidly and becoming an epidemic -- and potentially a global pandemic -- using the analogy of lining up pieces of Swiss cheese, with the different risk factors equating to holes in the cheese. "When they line up, you get an epidemic," he said. He highlighted an outbreak of Rift Valley virus in East Africa in 1997. The combination of an El Niño event pushing humans away from their homes and closer to cattle, combined with increased rainfall producing more breeding sites for disease-spreading mosquitoes, led to the largest documented outbreak of this virus. It involved five countries and infected an estimated 90,000 people. "All these (factors) came together and led to an outbreak," Heymann said. Despite what we know about the aspects of modern life that put us at greater risk, all three experts believe the world is not quite ready to handle what is inevitably coming. "We need to do a lot better," Feinberg said. "We need to prepare in advance, not respond." His program, the Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness Innovations, is working to do just that. It's aiding the development of vaccines against viruses that it believes need attention and are in families of infections that are likely to pose a risk, such as MERS CoV, which continues to persist in the Middle East and has been reported in almost 20 countries outside that region. The program will also be looking to develop platforms on which vaccines can be made more rapidly so that the general development time frame of 15 to 20 years can be shrunk significantly to respond to a new virus -- even moreso than those being developed against Ebola and Zika. "That's the kind of capability we need," Feinberg said. "The pathogens we don't know about pose the greatest threat." Combined with other global and national strategies programs -- such as WHO regulations and national response teams -- Feinberg is optimistic. "We are far away from that goal," he said. "But I am encouraged, as they are all working on this."  
1491408443	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/05/us/nd-teen-ivy-league-trnd/index.html	Martin Altenburg: ND teen gets into all 8 Ivy League schools - CNN.com	(CNN)Another brilliant student has joined an exclusive academic club -- and now that teen in New Jersey won't be the only one agonizing over which Ivy League school to choose this fall. A student in North Dakota has the same decision to make. Martin Altenburg, a high school senior in Fargo, was also accepted into all eight Ivy League schools. "I wanted to just apply to as many schools as possible because ... I wasn't sure where I'd get in and where I wouldn't get in," Altenburg told CNN affiliate WDAY. Well, that strategy obviously worked because Altenburg will now choose between Harvard, Yale, Cornell, Columbia, the University of Pennsylvania, Princeton, Dartmouth and Brown. "Yale was the last letter I opened," he said. "And I was like, 'OK, if I get into this, I've gotten into all eight Ivy Leagues.'" But that's not all. He was also accepted at Stanford and MIT. Busy schedule reaps rewards As busy a schedule as Altenburg keeps, its amazing he even had time to fill out all of those college applications. He told WDAY at school he's involved in cross-country. And swimming. And track. And orchestra. And chamber orchestra. And youth symphony. He's the district lieutenant governor for Key Club. And he runs a Twitter account for his calculator. No really. Altenburg, who is a student at Fargo North High School, hasn't made his decision yet, but he's leaning toward Princeton, Stanford, Harvard or MIT. Students getting into all of the Ivies is a monumental feat that few achieve. Just this week Ifeoma White-Thorpe of New Jersey said she got acceptance letters from all eight schools. And over the past couple of years four other students -- Kwasi Enin in 2014, Harold Ekeh in 2015 and Augusta Uwamanzu-Nna and Kelly Hyles last year -- also joined this exclusive club.  
1491408431	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/05/politics/king-abdullah-donald-trump-jordan/index.html	Abdullah and Trump: United against ISIS, divided on refugees - CNNPolitics.com	Washington (CNN)When King Abdullah II of Jordan was presented with a wave of refugees from Syria, he welcomed more than a million people into his country. When President Donald Trump was presented the same, he closed the door. The two world leaders meeting Wednesday are united in the fight against ISIS but are each other's antithesis when it comes to responding to the now ever-present problem of Syrian refugees. The meeting comes as the focus on Syria's ongoing civil war is at its brightest: The White House, along with activist groups and other foreign leaders, blamed forces tied to Syrian President Bashar al-Assad on Tuesday for a chemical attack in a rebel-controlled area of Syria. Pictures of children writhing in pain from the attack have plastered TVs around the world, bringing into focus the human impact the ongoing war. White House officials said this week that Middle East peace and the refugee crisis will be among the topics the two world leaders will discuss Wednesday. The official White House visit, which will see a joint news conference with the two world leaders and an Oval Office meeting, is the second time Abdullah and Trump have seen each other this year. The two met briefly in February around an annual Washington prayer breakfast. Abdullah also met with Vice President Mike Pence in February to discuss the fight against terrorism and the Syrian crisis, according to the White House. But Wednesday's visit will also put a sharper focus on the differences between the two world leaders, especially in terms of the ongoing refugee issue that has put pressure on Jordan's economy. Jordan and the refugees The Syrian civil war has caused 4.81 million Syrians to flee their country, according to the United Nations, while 6.3 million people have been displaced internally. Jordan's response to the crisis was to take in over million refugees, the country's leaders have said, a decision that dramatically altered the make-up of the oil-less Middle Eastern country that shares a 233-mile border with Syria. The United Nations has registered close to 700,000 refugees in Jordan alone. "We really didn't have much choice," Abdullah told CBS in 2016. "They were flooding across the border, being shot by the Syrian regime and Jordan has always been a place that opens its arms to refugees from many countries unfortunately." The decision has increased Jordan's population by 20%, Abdullah said, straining the country's ability provide basic necessities, like water, to the refugees, while at the same time decreasing the services Jordanian citizens have received from their government. "Jordan is fatigued and has reached its maximum carrying capacity whether in terms of available resources," Jordanian Prime Minister Hani al-Mulki said Tuesday. "Without the continued support of the international community this will negatively impact our overstretched ability to continue providing necessary services to Syrians." Despite the troubles, though, Abdullah's decision stands in stark contrast with Trump, who -- days after assuming office in January -- directed his administration to shut the door on Syrian refugees. "I'm establishing new vetting measures to keep radical Islamic terrorists out of the United States of America. We don't want them here," Trump said as he signed the order. "We only want to admit those into our country who will support our country and love deeply our people." While that order -- and a subsequent order that looked to do something similar -- have been blocked by courts, the Trump administration has made clear that Syrian refugees will not be welcome without a pause in the program. Trump capped his presidential campaign by routinely promising to "suspend" the Syrian refugee program and slammed Hillary Clinton, his 2016 opponent, for advocating the United States increase the number of Syrian refugees they accept. "Hillary Clinton wants a 550% increase in Syrian refugees pouring into our countries," Trump said days before the election in Florida. "Her plan would mean generations of terrorism and extremism spreading in your schools and all throughout your communities." United against ISIS One area on which Trump and Abdullah do agree is the fight against ISIS, where both world leaders are supportive of going after the terrorist organization. Abdullah, a former special operations commander in Jordan, told CNN in 2015 that while ISIS is trying to link itself to Islam, "These people... are on the fringe of Islam." And he has cracked down violently on the group. When ISIS captured Jordanian pilot Moaz al-Kasasbeh in 2015 and killed him by putting him inside a cage and setting it on fire with a flamethrower, Abdullah responded by hanging two prisoners, including one that ISIS had previously requested be released. Jordan has also played a key role in the campaign against ISIS, regularly participating in air attacks against the group and sharing intelligence with the CIA and other American organizations. Trump campaigned on a platform of tough talk on ISIS, including pledging to "bomb the hell" out of the group. "I will quickly and decisively bomb the hell out of ISIS, will rebuild our military and make it so strong no-one -- and I mean, no one -- will mess with us," he said in a radio ad during the campaign.  
1491408184	http://money.cnn.com/2017/04/05/media/pepsi-kendall-jenner-tone-deaf-ads/index.html	Pepsi and Kendall Jenner join the rogues' gallery of tone-deaf ads - Apr. 5, 2017	Kendall Jenner's ad sparks controversy Pepsi's attempt to piggyback on a social movement with the help of Kendall Jenner is only the latest tone-deaf ad to backfire miserably. The commercial, in which Jenner ditches a photo shoot to join a street protest and then gives a Pepsi to a police officer, might have been an attempt to capitalize on a message of youth and universal harmony. That's what Coca-Cola (KO) did with its iconic "Hilltop" ad in 1971, as "Mad Men" fans know. But "I'd Like to Teach the World to Sing" this was not. Critics accused the Pepsi ad of exploiting the Black Lives Matter movement, noting the similarity to the famous photo of leshia Evans, a protester who peacefully faced off with Louisiana police after the fatal shooting of a black man last year. Pepsi (PEP) told CNN the ad was meant to reflect "people from different walks of life coming together in a spirit of harmony." It's only the latest doozy from Pepsi. In 2013, Pepsi pulled a Mountain Dew ad that depicted a beaten and distraught white woman facing a police lineup of black suspects and a goat. Related: Pepsi ad with Kendall Jenner invites backlash And Pepsi is far from the only offender. There's a long history of ads so tone-deaf that it's hard to understand how they ever saw the light of day. -- Just Wednesday, Nivea, the German skin care company, pulled a deodorant ad that depicted a woman and the slogan "white is purity." The ad was posted on Nivea's Middle East Facebook (FB, Tech30) page. The company ran into similar trouble in 2011, when it apologized for an ad depicting a black man and the slogan "Re-civilize Yourself." -- A Burger King ad that appeared in Singapore in 2009 depicted a woman with her mouth open and, suggestively placed next to it, the company's BK Super Seven Incher burger. The caption said, "It just tastes better." In a YouTube video years later, the woman said she didn't know her image was being used for that ad. Burger King reportedly blamed an ad agency in Singapore. -- Bud Light bottles in 2015 sported the slogan "The perfect beer for removing 'no' from your vocabulary for the night," part of an ad campaign called Up for Whatever. Executives for the brand, which is owned by Anheuser Busch (BUDFF), later said they regretted the ad. Related: Chinese detergent ad panned for racism -- Last year, a Chinese company called Qiaobi ran a detergent ad that showed an Asian woman shoving a black man into a laundry machine, then pulling out an Asian man, whom she seemed to prefer. Like the Pepsi-Jenner spot, it was vilified not only for being offensive, but for being offensively clueless. CNNMoney (New York) First published April 5, 2017: 12:03 PM ET
1491408101	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/04/politics/ivanka-trump-complicit/index.html	Ivanka Trump: 'I don't know what it means to be complicit' - CNNPolitics.com	Washington (CNN)If Ivanka Trump is "complicit," as critics and even a "Saturday Night Live" perfume sketch allege, she's not concerned. "I don't know what it means to be complicit, but I hope time will prove that I have done a good job and much more importantly, that my father's administration is the success that I know it will be," Trump told CBS News' Gayle King in an interview taped Tuesday. Asked by King how she feels about the accusation, Trump defended herself. "I don't know that the critics who may say that of me, if they found themselves in this very unique and unprecedented situation that I am now in, would do any differently than I am doing," she said. "So I hope to make a positive impact." The interview, taped at her Washington home, was Trump's first since her father, President Donald Trump, assumed office in January. Since officially joining her father's administration as special assistant to the President, she has slowly ramped up her public appearances, speaking last week at an event promoting young woman in STEM and discussing apprenticeships and vocational training earlier Tuesday. Though she initially eschewed a defined role -- she once said, "I'm going to be a daughter" in her father's White House -- Trump said her path to formally joining the administration happened "organically" during the early days of the presidency. "I realized that having one foot in and one foot out wouldn't work," she said. "And the reality is that it all happened very organically for me." In her new role, Trump will continue her work on women's economic empowerment. "I'm very focused on the role of education," she added. The President's eldest daughter, who has been a key and trusted adviser to her father well before his bid for office, was asked how she would respond to critics holding her accountable for not speaking out against her father's positions. "I would say not to conflate lack of public denouncement with silence. I think there are multiple ways to have your voice heard. In some cases, it's through protest and it's through going on the nightly news and talking about or denouncing every issue on which you disagree with," said Trump, who has been absent from the media circuit until this interview. "Other times, it is quietly and directly and candidly. So where I disagree with my father, he knows it. And I express myself with total candor. Where I agree, I fully lean in and support the agenda and hope that I can be an asset to him and make a positive impact." Rare media leaks about Trump and her husband, Jared Kushner, have crafted the pair's image as a moderating force when it comes to social issues, including LGBT rights and climate change. However, Trump declined to name an issue on which she disagrees with her father. "For me, this isn't about promoting my viewpoints. I wasn't elected by the American people to be president. My father is going to do a tremendous job. And I want to help him do that," she said. She also reflected on her adjustment to her life in Washington with her three small children, noting various field trips across the district, including one recent stop at a monster truck rally. "They don't have them nearby in New York because I've looked for years. We went in Baltimore. But every week, I try to do something different and unique and really celebrate being in a different city and in a different community," she said.  
1491408045	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/05/politics/un-security-council-resolution-syria/index.html	UN Security Council eyes condemnation of Assad regime for Syria attack - CNNPolitics.com	Washington (CNN)Members of the United Nations Security Council may vote Wednesday on a resolution condemning the Syrian government for the chemical weapons attack on civilians. Representatives from the United States, United Kingdom and France have ‎circulated a draft resolution demanding that the Syrian government provide flight logs from Tuesday, the day of the attack, which killed dozens, including many children. The draft also calls for meetings with Syrian generals or other officers. The resolution -- facing a likely veto from Russia, which backs the regime of Syrian President Bashar al-Assad -- explicitly condemns the use of chemical weapons within Syria and states that their use represents a threat to international peace and security. An emergency Security Council meeting was called at UN headquarters in response to the suspected targeted attack. The Syrian military under Assad has denied responsibility for the attack, claiming it would never use chemical weapons. Multiple countries denounced the attack on Wednesday before and during the Security Council hearing. Bahram Qasemi, a spokesperson for Iran's Foreign Ministry, said the country "strongly condemns" the use of chemical weapons in Syria "regardless of the perpetrators and the victims." France's UN ambassador, François Delattre, said of the attack: "That reminds us of the day of the regime's attack on Damascus. This chemical horror opens a new spiral into the abyss of the human tragedy." But Russian Foreign Ministry spokeswoman Maria Zakharova blasted the resolution, telling reporters Wednesday it was "unacceptable" and that it was drafted too quickly. The UK and Chinese ambassadors also exchanged sharp words over responsibility for UN inaction. UK Ambassador Matthew Rycroft condemned prior vetoes by China and Russia, which blocked international action on Syria. But China's Ambassador Liu Jieyi, in a rare diplomatic outburst, said the UK delegate should stop "abusing" the Security Council. CNN's Bijan Hosseini and Radina Gigova contributed to this report. 
1491407909	http://money.cnn.com/2017/04/04/media/list-oreilly-factor-advertisers-responses/index.html	Read what Bill O'Reilly's sponsors are saying about 'disturbing allegations' of harassment - Apr. 4, 2017	O'Reilly accuser: I'm not after money Fox News' "The O'Reilly Factor" is facing a rapidly growing exodus of advertisers in the wake of a New York Times report that five different women had reached settlements over allegations of sexual harassment or verbal abuse against the show's host, Bill O'Reilly. CNNMoney has reached out to dozens of the companies that have run ads on the program. Below is a list of the responses we've received so far, as well as some that companies have put on their Twitter accounts responding to people asking about their ads. Companies pulling their ads from "The O'Reilly Factor" Mercedes-Benz: "Yes, we had advertising running on The O'Reilly Factor (we run on most major cable news shows) and it has been reassigned in the midst of this controversy. The allegations are disturbing and, given the importance of women in every aspect of our business, we don't feel this is a good environment in which to advertise our products right now." Hyundai: "Hyundai currently has no advertising on The O'Reilly Factor. We had upcoming advertising spots on the show but are reallocating them due to the recent and disturbing allegations. As a company we seek to partner with companies and programming that share our values of inclusion and diversity. We will continue to monitor and evaluate the situation as we plan future advertising decisions." BMW of North America: "In light of the recent New York Times investigation, BMW of North America has suspended its advertising with 'The O'Reilly Factor.'" Mitsubishi: "Mitsubishi Motors takes these allegations very seriously and we have decided that we will pull our advertising at the present time. We will continue to monitor this situation as we assess our long-term strategy." Lexus: "We take our duties as a responsible advertiser seriously and have been closely monitoring the situation involving 'The O'Reilly Factor.' In response, we have asked our media-buying partners to move all Lexus ad inventory out of the program." Ainsworth Pet Nutrition: "We removed our advertising from the program because of these recent and disturbing allegations." Constant Contact: "Based on the recent allegations and our strong commitment to inclusion, respect and tolerance in the workplace, we have decided to pull Constant Contact's ads from The O'Reilly Factor." Credit Karma: "In light of the recent concerning allegations, we will not be advertising on this show and have asked for our ads to be removed." Bayer: "Bayer supports a safe, respectful and non-abusive environment for women and we have reached out to Fox to voice our concerns regarding this matter. Based on the serious nature of these allegations, we have made the decision to suspend all advertising on the program in question. This suspension has been requested immediately and will be handled as expeditiously as possible. We have been informed, however, that programming changes may not become effective immediately. It is important to note that Bayer purchases packages of advertising time across all major networks without selecting placement on any specific program. We regularly evaluate our advertising purchases to make sound judgments to continue or discontinue based upon our beliefs, values and ethical considerations." TrueCar: "Pending further assessment of recent developments, we have instructed our media buyer to direct our advertising to other programming." GlaxoSmithKline: "We are continually reviewing our advertising to ensure it is conducted in a responsible manner aligned with our values. We have temporarily put a hold on spots running on The O'Reilly Factor while we assess this situation." Sanofi: "At Sanofi Consumer Healthcare, decisions about advertising on any given website, network, magazine, or programs are never undertaken as an endorsement or non-endorsement of the host, editorial or entertainment content. Rather, our purpose in advertising our product is to provide important information to consumers so that they may make an informed decision about which product will best provide relief for their symptoms. The controversy around The O'Reilly Factor program and allegations made against Bill O'Reilly are matters that we take seriously and will continue to monitor. We do not endorse the behavior or opinions of program hosts or the content. We have reallocated our current advertising originally scheduled during this program. We will continue to monitor and evaluate the situation as we plan future advertising decisions." UNTUCKit: "As a company in which more than 2/3rd of our employees are women, we take sexual harassment claims very seriously. Moreover, it is important our corporate partners reflect the same principles of inclusivity and equality upon which we have built our brand. In light of the disturbing allegations, we instructed our media buyer this morning to reallocate our ad dollars to other shows effective immediately. We will continue to closely monitor the situation but believe this is the right decision at this time." Allstate: "Inclusivity and support for women are important Allstate values. We are concerned about the issues surrounding the program and we have suspended our advertising." Esurance: "In light of the recent controversies surrounding Bill O'Reilly and his treatment of women, Esurance is suspending its advertising during "The O'Reilly Factor." At Esurance, inclusion and support for women extends across all aspects of our business — from our associates to our customers to our partners. And we want to partner with organizations and programming that share those same values." T. Rowe Price: "We regularly evaluate our media buys to ensure alignment with our corporate values, and in light of the recent allegations we have decided to pull our upcoming ads from The O'Reilly Factor." Wayfair: "We do not have any future ad buys planned for the show at this time. We condemn all forms of harassment and are closely assessing the situation. We have advertised on the show in the past and in light of the reports have moved our spots to other programming while we assess the situation." Orkin: "Orkin buys its advertising in broad dayparts on networks that reach our target audience. We do not buy specific shows, including the O'Reilly Factor. The O'Reilly Factor is in the daypart that we buy on Fox, and we have added that show to our "Do Not Buy" list in the wake of the current allegations." Society for Human Resource Management: "SHRM has determined to cease its current advertising on the Fox News Network." The Wonderful Company: "At The Wonderful Company, we are committed to a respectful and inclusive workplace enviornment and insist upon the same from our business partners. We do not currently have or plan for ad inventory on this show." Coldwell Banker: "We were disappointed that our ad ran on O'Reilly as it wasn't part of our intentional media programming. We pulled future ads from the show." H&R Block: "We share your concern about recent allegations, and no longer advertise during The O'Reilly Factor as a result." Weather Tech: "We are already working on adjusting our advertising schedule and we appreciate your feedback." Companies currently evaluating whether or not to keep advertising on "The O'Reilly Factor" Trivago: "We are constantly reviewing our media buys to ensure we do not support any behavior that contradicts trivago's corporate values. We are currently reviewing the information available, but do not discuss our advertising strategy publicly." Enterprise Holdings: "We are looking into this, but we haven't made any decisions." TD Ameritrade: "We don't have a direct media buy with the program, and we have only run advertising on the show once in the last quarter. We have no plans to run anything else, at a minimum, until much later in the spring. Harassment in any form is unacceptable, and because one of our core values is People Matter, this is a situation that we are monitoring closely. If we need to make additional changes to our media buying strategy down the road, we have the flexibility to do so." Expedia: "We regularly evaluate all of our media buying, as we are doing now with regard to this program." Companies that will continue to advertise on "The O'Reilly Factor" Angie's List: "The advertising strategy we have long used at Angie's List is meant to reach as many people as possible with news that our service exists and is available to them. We place ads across a wide spectrum of venues intending to reach as many viewers/listeners/ readers as possible without taking a position on the viewpoints of the venues themselves. Just as we trust members to make their own hiring decisions, we trust them to make their own media consumption decisions." Companies that have ceased advertising on "The O'Reilly Factor" for other reasons CFP Board: "CFP Board does not have a partnership or a sponsorship with Fox News. Our television advertising is purchased through an advertising network where the advertisements are placed on multiple cable television channels and shows. As our spring flight is winding down, we will no longer have any placements on Fox News." Companies that aren't saying Jenny Craig: "As an organization, Jenny Craig condemns any and all forms of sexual harassment. As a matter of corporate policy, we do not publicly comment on our advertising strategy. What I can tell you is that we are constantly evaluating our media buys to maximize the efficiency of our corporate investment and effectively reach our target audience." Quincy Bioscience: "We don't publicly comment on our advertising. As a company we condemn all forms of sexual harassment." CNNMoney (New York) First published April 4, 2017: 1:29 PM ET
1491408869	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/05/politics/steve-bannon-white-house-national-security-council/index.html	In reversal, Bannon removed from National Security Council - CNNPolitics.com	(CNN)Steve Bannon, President Donald Trump's chief strategist, has been removed from his permanent seat at the National Security Council, multiple sources tell CNN, moving the council into a more traditional format. The decision, which one source with knowledge said was made by Trump himself, comes after the President in January authorized the reorganization of the National Security Council to include Bannon as a permanent member of the panel. In a regulatory filing posted Wednesday, Bannon's title was removed from the standing list of members of the National Security Council. Bannon's removal was first reported by Bloomberg. Multiple sources looked to minimize the removal. One argued that Bannon was put on the council to ensure that it no longer "micro-managed" foreign policy and was put on a more "operational track." Another said Bannon was only on board to oversee former national security adviser Mike Flynn's work to "de-operationalize" the National Security Council from the broad purview it had under Susan Rice, President Barack Obama's national security adviser. Flynn, after his undisclosed contacts with Russian operatives were revealed through media reports, resigned from the council in February. H.R. McMaster, a United States Army lieutenant general, was named national security adviser later in February. A source with knowledge of the move said Bannon can "still attend any meeting" where his expertise is needed. "In all the time he was there, he only attended one principals' meeting," the source said. "He is still welcome to attend principal meetings." The decision to elevate Bannon in the first place was a controversial one because, at the same time, the order indicated that the director of national intelligence and the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff would not be regular attendees. The committee is a Cabinet-level group of agencies focused on national security that was established by President George H. W. Bush in 1989. Regular members of the Principals Committee will include the secretary of state, the treasury secretary, the defense secretary, the attorney general, the secretary of Homeland Security, the assistant to the President and chief of staff, the assistant to the President and chief strategist, the national security adviser and the Homeland Security adviser. Former acting CIA chief Michael Morell sharply criticized the move in January, calling it "unprecedented" in an appearance on "CBS This Morning." "I have never been to a principals' meeting where the views of the DNI and the views of the chairman are not relevant," said Morell, who advised Hillary Clinton's campaign for president. "Every principals' meeting starts with an intelligence briefing by the DNI." Bannon's accession also demonstrated the breadth of his influence inside the White House, signaling that the former head of Brietbart News' influence extended beyond politics and domestic policy. CNN's Nicole Gaouette contributed to this report. 
1491408807	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/05/politics/un-security-council-resolution-syria/index.html	Haley: If UN won't act on Syria, 'we may' - CNNPolitics.com	Washington (CNN)US Ambassador to the United Nations Nikki Haley strongly condemned Russia and the Syrian government Wednesday over the chemical weapons attack on civilians, suggesting that the US is open to using military action to solve the country's ongoing civil war. "When the UN consistently fails in its duty to act collectively, there are times in the life of states that we are compelled to take our own action," Haley said, adding that if the UN doesn't take action, "we may." Haley, who is also the UN Security Council president, was speaking as the council considers a resolution condemning the Assad regime for the attack, which killed dozens, including many children. Russia, which backs the regime of Syrian President Bashar al-Assad, is likely to veto the resolution. "How many more children have to die before Russia cares?" Haley said as she displayed photos of the victims. Her comments are the most direct threat of unilateral action by the US delegation at the UN to solve the Syria crisis. The remarks are especially notable as the Trump administration has struck a more lenient tone on the regime of Assad, breaking with the Obama administration in demanding he abdicate power. Representatives from the US, United Kingdom and France have ‎circulated a draft resolution demanding that the Syrian government provide flight logs from Tuesday, the day of the attack, which killed dozens, including many children. The draft also calls for meetings with Syrian generals or other officers. The resolution explicitly condemns the use of chemical weapons within Syria and states that their use represents a threat to international peace and security. An emergency Security Council meeting was called at UN headquarters in response to the suspected targeted attack. The Syrian military under Assad has denied responsibility for the attack, claiming it would never use chemical weapons. Multiple countries denounced the attack on Wednesday before and during the Security Council hearing. Bahram Qasemi, a spokesperson for Iran's Foreign Ministry, said the country "strongly condemns" the use of chemical weapons in Syria "regardless of the perpetrators and the victims." France's UN ambassador, François Delattre, said of the attack: "That reminds us of the day of the regime's attack on Damascus. This chemical horror opens a new spiral into the abyss of the human tragedy." But Russian Foreign Ministry spokeswoman Maria Zakharova blasted the resolution, telling reporters Wednesday it was "unacceptable" and that it was drafted too quickly. The UK and Chinese ambassadors also exchanged sharp words over responsibility for UN inaction. UK Ambassador Matthew Rycroft condemned prior vetoes by China and Russia, which blocked international action on Syria. But China's Ambassador Liu Jieyi, in a rare diplomatic outburst, said the UK delegate should stop "abusing" the Security Council. CNN's Bijan Hosseini and Radina Gigova contributed to this report. 
1491409845	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/03/health/pandemic-risk-virus-bacteria/index.html	Global pandemics: 7 reasons we're more at risk - CNN.com	(CNN)It could take just one cough, one kiss, one touch or even one bite to change not only your life, but the lives of everyone around you -- and for months or even years. In most cases, the closer those people are to you, the greater the risk. But it isn't always that simple. The risk at hand: an infectious outbreak. Public health experts believe we are at greater risk than ever of experiencing large-scale outbreaks and global pandemics like those we've seen before: SARS, swine flu, Ebola and Zika. More than 28,000 people were infected during the 2014-16 Ebola epidemic, with over 11,000 deaths. And as of March 10, 84 countries have reported Zika transmission. That disease was discovered in the 1940s, but had its first outbreak in 2007 in Micronesia, and more recently began spreading toward the end of 2015. Every time, the infection's arrival is unexpected and its scale unprecedented, leaving the world vulnerable. Experts are unanimous in the belief that the next outbreak contender will most likely be a surprise -- and we need to be ready. "We're only as secure in the world as the weakest country," said Jimmy Whitworth, professor of international public health at the London School of Hygiene & Tropical Medicine. With so many health systems and economies in a fragile state, this means we are far from secure. "Infectious diseases respect no boundaries," he said. The World Health Organization is alerted to hundreds of small outbreaks every month, he noted, which it investigates and uses to predict the chances of a bigger problem. "There are little clusters of outbreaks occurring all the time, all over the place," Whitworth said. But with infections disregarding borders and their battle lines against humans drawn, he believes the way we live today is what opens us up to risk. "(Many) aspects of modern life put us at more risk. We are more ready than before," he points out, highlighting the International Health Regulations Global Outbreak Alert and Response Network and countries with national rapid response teams -- such as the United States, UK and China -- ready to tackle any emergency. "But the stakes keep getting raised," he said. Here's why. 1. Growing populations and urbanization The facts around urban living are simple: You live, eat, work and move closer to people than in any rural setting, and with this comes greater opportunity for disease to spread through air, mosquitoes or unclean water. As populations grow, so will the number of city-dwellers, with the United Nations predicting that 66% of the global population will live in urban areas by 2050. More people in cities can "put a strain on sanitation," said David Heymann, head of the Centre for Global Health Security at the think tank Chatham House. Beyond people's close proximity, "this is a second source of infection," he said, and a third is increased food demand, causing farmers to grow more food, with more animals, making them likely to live closer to those animals as well. Animals are reservoirs for many diseases, including cattle for tuberculosis and African sleeping sickness (trypanosomiasis) and poultry for avian flu. With people moving more regularly from -- and between -- rural settings to urban ones, the chances of them becoming infected and then living in close quarters with others further boosts the potential for things to spread. 2. Encroaching into new environments As numbers of people grow, so does the amount of land needed to house them. Populations expand into previously uninhabited territories, such as forests. With new territories comes contact with new animals and, inevitably, new infections. For one example, "Lassa fever occurs because people live in the forest and destroy it for farming," Heymann said. Lassa fever is a viral disease spread by contact with the feces of infected rodents. It can cause fever and hemorrhaging of various parts of the body, including the eyes and nose. Person-to-person transmission is also possible, albeit less common. Outbreaks generally occur in West Africa, with higher than expected rates in Nigeria since 2016. Heymann explains that Lassa is one example of people living near forest environments where infected rodents reside, but destruction of those forests for agriculture leaves the animals nowhere to go -- other than humans' homes. "The rodents that live there can't get food and go into human areas for food," he said. 3. Climate change Evidence continues to emerge that climate change is resulting in greater numbers of heat waves and flooding events, bringing more opportunity for waterborne diseases such as cholera and for disease vectors such as mosquitoes in new regions. "Flooding is occurring with increased frequency," Heymann said, and with that comes greater risk of outbreaks. Between 2030 and 2050, climate change is projected to cause about 250,000 additional deaths per year from heat stress, malnutrition and the spread of infectious diseases like malaria, according to the World Health Organization. With disease carriers like mosquitoes increasingly able to live in new unprotected territory, the risk of an outbreak is high. Whitworth cited the current yellow fever outbreak in Angola, which has infected more than 350 people. He explained that as workers from China returned home from Angola, any yellow fever infection could have been transmitted by mosquitoes in China. But, the workers' return in winter meant the insects weren't around to transmit through bites. 4. Global travel "We're vulnerable because of increased travel," Whitworth said. International tourist arrivals reached a record of almost 1.2 billion in 2015, according to the UN World Tourism Organization, 50 million more than 2014. It was the sixth consecutive year of above-average growth. And with greater numbers moving at all times come greater options for infections to hop a ride. "Infectious agents travel around in humans many times within their incubation period," Heymann said. An incubation period is the time between infection and the onset of symptoms, meaning people can transmit an infection though they won't appear to be sick. The SARS (severe acute respiratory syndrome) pandemic of 2003 is thought to have begun with Dr. Liu Jianlun, who developed symptoms of the airborne virus on a trip to Huang Xingchu in China and then went to visit family in Hong Kong. He infected people at his hotel and his family. He was then hospitalized and died, as did one of his relatives. In less than four months, about 4,000 cases and 550 deaths from SARS could be traced to Liu's stay in Hong Kong. More than 8,000 other people became infected across more than 30 countries worldwide. But Heymann stresses that "it's not just humans" who spread disease through travel. Infections spread through insects, food and animals moved between countries. "It's also trade," he said, pointing to airport malaria, in which people in airports have become infected with malaria through mosquitoes that have hitched a ride on a plane or in food. He also described bird flu that was stopped at the Belgian border in Thai eagles being traded as pets in 2004. Guinea rats shipped as pets in the United States in 2003 harbored infections with monkey pox, he noted, which then entered prairie dogs and eventually humans. 5. Civil conflict "If a health system cannot handle (an outbreak), there's pandemonium," Heymann said. He believes that poor hygiene is not a valid excuse anywhere, even in developing settings, as sterilization and hand-washing are straightforward. But if a country is on the brink of breakdown from civil unrest, the ability to handle an intense and sudden problem like an outbreak could bring its people to their knees -- and allow the infection to flourish. "Outbreaks can completely paralyze countries," said Whitworth, citing the 2014 Ebola epidemic in which Sierra Leone, Guinea and Liberia were "quite close to collapsing." Civil unrest had plagued all three countries, leaving their economic and health infrastructures in dire need of rebuilding -- and ill-prepared for a major infection to strike. That problem combined with human movement between these three countries and others more globally meant Ebola was able to spread, even though dozens of infections in previous years in nearby Democratic Republic of Congo were self-contained and often resolved themselves. "If (an infection) stays local, it burns out," Heymann said. "People learn what to do." 6. Fewer doctors and nurses in outbreak regions Beyond weak health systems, countries where outbreaks are more likely to occur -- namely, more developing settings -- also have fewer doctors and nurses to treat the population. Most have left for better prospects elsewhere. "We have to deal with that as a reality," Heymann said, adding that some countries even encourage young medical talent to travel to new regions. "It's difficult to manage health worker migration," he said. But programs and strategies are underway to tackle this by "task-shifting," moving responsibilities to new groups and training them to deliver care, such as community health workers. "Communities have to be resilient," he said, and assigning tasks to people at all levels could mean a greater team available when a new infection strikes. 7. Faster information In the information age, new levels of communication bring even newer levels of fear and multiple ways to spread it, experts believe. Although the majority of small outbreaks may once have gone largely unknown by populations farther from the epicenter, people today are more informed than ever and require transparent, factual information to be fast-flowing. Google has been been using searches for symptoms to help identify when an outbreak may occur, such as with the flu. "The world looks for an authority," said Heymann, who believes the WHO adopts that role but needs to be faster and more transparent with information. The organization was criticized for being too slow to respond and unprepared for the 2014 Ebola outbreak. "But social media has become active ... and that's an area that's difficult to control," he said. The posting and shaping of information by multiple people can change messaging and what people read and believe, Heymann added. It may not all be bad, he said, but the point is that it can shape the way information travels, potentially inciting fear and stigma. "Not all information on the internet or social media is accurate," said Mark Feinberg, chairman of the scientific advisory committee of the recently launched Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness Innovations. "Ensuring accurate communication to the public is critically important." The coalition, launched in January, will address the surprise nature of outbreaks and epidemics to try to prevent them, rather than respond to them. Lining up the elements Heymann describes the likelihood of a new infection spreading rapidly and becoming an epidemic -- and potentially a global pandemic -- using the analogy of lining up pieces of Swiss cheese, with the different risk factors equating to holes in the cheese. "When they line up, you get an epidemic," he said. He highlighted an outbreak of Rift Valley virus in East Africa in 1997. The combination of an El Niño event pushing humans away from their homes and closer to cattle, combined with increased rainfall producing more breeding sites for disease-spreading mosquitoes, led to the largest documented outbreak of this virus. It involved five countries and infected an estimated 90,000 people. "All these (factors) came together and led to an outbreak," Heymann said. Despite what we know about the aspects of modern life that put us at greater risk, all three experts believe the world is not quite ready to handle what is inevitably coming. "We need to do a lot better," Feinberg said. "We need to prepare in advance, not respond." His program, the Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness Innovations, is working to do just that. It's aiding the development of vaccines against viruses that it believes need attention and are in families of infections that are likely to pose a risk, such as MERS CoV, which continues to persist in the Middle East and has been reported in almost 20 countries outside that region. The program will also be looking to develop platforms on which vaccines can be made more rapidly so that the general development time frame of 15 to 20 years can be shrunk significantly to respond to a new virus -- even moreso than those being developed against Ebola and Zika. "That's the kind of capability we need," Feinberg said. "The pathogens we don't know about pose the greatest threat." Combined with other global and national strategies programs -- such as WHO regulations and national response teams -- Feinberg is optimistic. "We are far away from that goal," he said. "But I am encouraged, as they are all working on this."  
1491409836	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/02/health/unseen-enemy-deadly-influenza-epidemic-gwen-zwanziger/index.html	How my daughter died from a simple case of flu - CNN.com	Gwen and Terry Zwanziger's 17-year-old daughter Shannon died unexpectedly in 2014 after losing a battle with influenza. Their story is included in CNN Films' "Unseen Enemy," premiering Friday, April 7 at 9 p.m. ET/PT on CNN. Owatonna, Minnesota (CNN)It's Day 836. I've cried more times today than I can count. You'd think by now, I could go days without crying, but I can't get over the guilt. Shannon's only complaint was a sore throat. Her fever wasn't even scary.  I spent (wasted is a better word) most of my morning Googling flu information again today. The complex science of mutating viruses leaves me boggled. If I can't make sense of it, how can I explain the importance of stopping the flu to others? After more than two years, my husband Terry and I haven't said the "D" word yet. We say "she went to heaven." We say "she left." Although I have said, "she died" several times, we somehow can't say the words "Shannon is d..."  No dreams of Shannon last night. I want to see you again so bad. If I could just talk to her one last time. Tell her how sorry I am. Does she know? Can she see from heaven? I have mixed feelings about how things work up there, I just know they do. Going through some books, I came across one of her homemade bookmarks she made, when she was little. I got a card from the donation center. They're doing a curb pick up next week for "gently used clothing." I can't do it yet.  There are pieces she hardly wore -- her new clothes for senior year -- that she only just began to wear. So yeah, they're gently used. Just barely used.  Flu Moms Day 837 is turning out to be an especially bad one. This is the kind of day I should go on Facebook and talk to the other mothers on our private page called "Flu Moms." Last time I got on, I noticed a couple of new names. Clearly children are still dying. I thank God for this group of moms. We can vent and encourage depending on our own mood -- a safe place to share how we feel and how we cope. Some of the mothers have developed nonprofits to honor their little ones. They plant municipal flowerbeds and organize 5k runs to raise money for awareness. God bless their efforts. 'Let it run its course' The seasonal flu kills healthy, active, precious kids every year. Shannon went to school on a Wednesday, came home like always, but said a friend "gave" her the flu. I sent her up to her room and began the same things any parent would do.  I brought her liquids, applesauce, and soup. She complained of a sore throat, so her dad brought home throat spray, Tylenol, throat lozenges, and a little gift. She developed a fever, but not so high to take her to the ER. Later that week, I thought she ought to be feeling better, so I wondered if she was taking advantage of days off of school and being waited on. I'd go into her room and her eyes would be closed. I couldn't tell if she was faking or not. I took her cell phone and tucked it under the clean laundry I'd put on her dresser for her to put away. Next time I went in, she had the phone back, so I knew she was OK. By Sunday, she just seemed weak. She was texting and watching TV, but she wasn't eating good and she seemed lethargic. So I sent her to the clinic with her dad, with a little journal of her temperature readings, liquid intake and even her O2 sats. I didn't go with them because I wanted to clean her room and change her sheets. All nice and fresh for her, you know? Terry sent me a picture of Shannon sitting in a wheelchair with a mask on, leaning her head on his shoulder. That's the last picture we have of her.  When they returned home, she walked in through the back door and said the visit to the doctor was a waste of time. The doctor just said it was the flu and to "let it run its course." The doctor didn't have a lot of time to spend with her, because the waiting room was packed with people who seemed to have the flu also. Her high school had something like 150 kids who were out of school with it. Thirty-four hours later, Shannon came downstairs. When she went into the bathroom, she tapped on the shower curtain, so I helped her into the tub. By this time I was sweating with fear. I hadn't helped her with a bath since she was little. Something was horribly wrong. When she leaned back in the tub and I saw her eyes, I knew she was dying. I got behind her and lifted her out. I sat on the toilet with her sitting on my lap and she died. There was nothing that could be done to save her. Health care professionals — from ambulance EMTs to the mighty Mayo Clinic — couldn't bring her back to me. The flu destroyed her organs. She didn't even know it. 'What if' Shannon chose not to get vaccinated. I wish she had. If I had pushed her into getting a flu shot, then I wouldn't have the guilt about "what if." What if the vaccine had given her a little extra control over the invasion? That's what the vaccine should do. While you can still get the flu even if you've had a flu shot, it can reduce the risk of serious illness and complications. Please take the flu seriously. Keep your loved ones home if you even think they might be sick. Or else you might live wondering if a classmate died because your child brought that strain into the classroom.  Talk openly about the flu. Make people around you aware that the flu is deadly. Talk to every leader you can.  Companies need to be more understanding about passing the flu around the work place and letting people stay home. Our government needs to hear from us. They need to be more transparent, honest and forthcoming about the seriousness. We need to get our scientists to find a universal flu vaccine. There are research efforts underway working on this. Instead of guessing in the spring which strains to put into the vaccine, they need a vaccine that will nip it in its core. Please take action. If we do nothing, then we are all to blame. And believe me, guilt will change your life. I was just a regular mom of a regular kid. Now I'm a shell of the person I was. And the world will never see what Shannon could have become.  
1491409803	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/05/golf/masters-golf-larry-mize-1987-playoff-greg-norman/index.html	Masters 2017: Larry Mize remembers outrageous chip that stunned golf - CNN.com	(CNN)It was a shot that defied the odds and defined a career, ensuring Larry Mize's name will forever be whispered around the galleries at Augusta National Golf Club. Faced with a daunting 100-foot chip onto a lightning-fast 11th green with water waiting behind, Mize famously holed out to win a playoff which saw him crowned 1987 Masters champion. "It doesn't get more exciting in golf for me than that day right there," Mize told CNN's Don Riddell on the eve of the 2017 tournament. "I hit it and I'm frozen watching it. It goes in the hole and I throw my club up and I ran around screaming like a mad man -- it was total elation," he adds. Mize's improbable win made him the first Augusta native ever to slip into the coveted Green Jacket. As a boy, Mize had worked the famous white Masters scoreboards that keep patrons up to date with the twists and turns of the tournament as they unfold during the four rounds. READ: A Masters champion's perfect day READ: Lexi Thompson pays price for TV viewer's intervention "I was on the third (hole) scoreboard," Mize recalls. "You climb up the ladder and you'd put the numbers on there and you have the little windows that you'd peek out and try and watch the play..." The playoff victory over Greg Norman -- and Seve Ballesteros, who had been eliminated at the previous hole -- was Mize's solitary major title and one of only four PGA Tour wins. Leafing through the giant scrapbook crammed with news cuttings and photos from that famous day, Mize has only one regret -- that he didn't enjoy the victory more at the time. "One mistake I realize looking back I would have probably watched it more and relived it more," Mize says. "I tried to go beyond it, continue to move on and stuff a little too quickly. I tell anybody now -- 'savor this, enjoy it!'" Like all past Masters champions, Mize is exempt from qualifying and can play in the tournament as long as he wishes, which he'll be doing again this year. Now 58 years old, Mize probably won't feature on the leaderboard in 2017, but whenever a ball lands wide right of the 11th green -- Larry Mize country, as it is known locally -- thoughts instinctively turn to his outrageous chip. Mize doesn't recall ever hitting his ball into the same place in rounds he's played since that dramatic Sunday three decades ago -- and he's hoping he doesn't start this year. Visit cnn.com/golf for more news and videos "I've never really been close to that spot again -- that I can remember -- and if I hit it there in a practice round I would move it, I wouldn't play it," he says. "It's just such a great memory I don't want to ruin it... I did it when I needed to and I want to keep that memory pure. It's been great for 30 years."  
1491409796	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/04/us/i-85-atlanta-fire-collapse/index.html	I-85 collapse: Atlanta highway could be fixed by June 15 - CNN.com	Atlanta (CNN)The traffic headaches from last week's collapse of an elevated portion of Interstate 85 in Atlanta could be over faster than initially thought. June 15 is now the target date for completing the replacement of I-85's damaged sections, state transportation Commissioner Russell McMurry said Tuesday -- sooner than previous estimates of at least several months. He called it a "very aggressive but attainable date" and "much better than our initial thought." GDOT's chief engineer, Meg Pirkle, detailed a few factors that she said is expediting the process: • The state has redesigned the span to incorporate a type of beam that is in standard use today, as opposed to beams that were called for in the span's original, 1980s design. The other beam type would have taken longer to manufacture. • Accelerated-curing concrete will be used. This is not typically done because it is expensive, Pirkle said, but it will be used here because of the state's desire to get the stretch back in operation. • Not all columns will be rebuilt from the foundations. Some will be retrofitted, instead. • A design team of 15 to 20 engineers worked throughout the weekend and submitted the final plan at midnight Sunday. "Completion of these plans in just three days is a huge milestone," Pirkle said. State will review storage policies; NTSB investigating McMurry said the state will review its policies on storing materials under bridges and elevated highways -- an issue in this case because authorities say last Thursday's fire started where the state kept high-density plastic conduits and other construction materials. The state was storing high-density polyethylene (HDPE) pipes and fiberglass conduits under the I-85 overpass, and the fire spread to the pipes, McMurry said. Authorities say they've arrested a man accused of intentionally setting the fire. The materials were in a state-owned lot under the overpass, behind a chain-linked fence with a locked gate, with a "no trespassing" sign, McMurry said. The National Transportation Safety Board is investigating the collapse and says the appropriateness of storing the materials under the span will be among the topics covered. "A couple points of interest include the integrity of the infrastructure, the flammability of the materials and the issue of storing flammable material under a bridge," NTSB spokesman Keith Holloway said. McMurry said the storage is not believed to have broken any current state policy. GDOT spokeswoman Natalie Dale has not responded to a CNN question about what GDOT's storage policies are. McMurry also said that lessons could be learned -- especially about whether the material was stored securely enough. "Obviously, what we know now, if we knew then, we would not have the material stored in the fashion that it was stored," he said, responding to question about how secure the site was. "The gating and the fencing was really to keep the material from being stolen or removed from the area." McMurry said he already sent a letter to other states' department of transportation officials "to make sure they may want to make a full assessment" about what they are storing under their bridges and how they are doing it. "Hopefully, (there will) be lessons learned, not only for Georgia, but the nation," he said of the coming review. How the fire, collapse happened The fire started under I-85 in northeast Atlanta, north of the highway's split with I-75. At first, I-85 motorists drove through the smoke, and firefighters fought the flames below. It eventually grew into a massive fireball; the road was closed and firefighters withdrew as the structure weakened. A portion of northbound I-85 collapsed, injuring no one. In total, about 700 feet of northbound and southbound I-85 must be replaced, officials say. The closure is proving to be a major challenge for motorists in one of the country's most congested cities. Traffic is being diverted to already heavily traveled I-75, I-285 and surface streets. Police arrested Basil Eleby on suspicion of setting the fire. He is charged with first-degree arson and criminal damage to property. Police also arrested two companions of his on charges of trespassing, alleging that they were with Eleby at the time; investigators say they believe all three are homeless. According to an affidavit obtained by CNN, one of the companions "watched Basil Eleby place a chair on top of a shopping cart, reach under the shopping cart and ignited it." Eleby told investigators that he and his companions talked about smoking cocaine under the highway overpass, according to the affidavit. He said he decided to smoke without his companions, and left before the fire started, the affidavit said. Plastic pipes had been there since roughly 2011 The fire eventually burned the HDPE pipes, which the state had stored there since about 2011, McMurry said. HDPE pipes encase and protect cables, and are widely used in the transportation industry to build "smart" highways that provide information to drivers, control traffic signal lights and tollways. Details about the fire and how it brought down the highway are under investigation. The flammability of HDPE is relatively low, said Tony Radoszewski, president of the Plastics Pipe Institute, a trade group based in Irving, Texas. HDPE would have to be exposed to a high-temperature flame for a considerable amount of time to burn, he said. "Somebody had to start a fire. It doesn't combust by itself, it needs fuel," Radoszewski told CNN. "Someone had to do it. It's not like someone would have dropped a match and it started." McMurry also has said that HDPE's flammability -- the ease at which something can be set on fire -- is low, and that it is "not uncommon" for states to store construction materials under bridges. But he said Tuesday the state checked what was being stored under bridges after last week's fire, and no other bridge in Georgia had been found to have HDPE stored under it. Pipes came from halted project The HDPE and fiberglass conduits were meant for a project that a contractor bid for in 2007, McMurry said. The contractor was to install advanced traffic management systems -- like cameras and message boards -- along State Route 400 between I-85 and I-285, McMurry said. But the contractor defaulted in 2008. The project eventually was done by a different contractor, who used different materials, the commissioner said. So, GDOT, which already paid for the unused conduits, took control of them "in hopes that it could be used for another project," McMurry said. The conduits initially were stored near an intersection of a surface street and State Route 13. By around 2011, McMurry said, they were moved to the lot under I-85, where the fire happened last week. GDOT has not responded to a CNN question about what, if anything, was in the conduits at the start of the fire. CNN's Michelle Krupa, Steve Almasy and Rene Marsh contributed to this report. 
1491409746	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/05/politics/trump-today-live-updates/index.html	President Trump today: Live updates - CNNPolitics.com	President Trump meets with the King of Jordan as his White House puts together a response to Syria. Meanwhile, the Senate goes to battle over Neil Gorsuch for Supreme Court. We're covering Trump's 76th day in office in real time.  
1491409198	http://money.cnn.com/2017/04/05/news/economy/india-farmers-loan-debt-canceled/index.html	India wipes out debt worth $5 billion for 21 million small farmers - Apr. 5, 2017	See two million knots turn into a carpet Millions of Indian farmers who borrowed from banks to finance their crops no longer have to pay their loans back. The country's biggest state, Uttar Pradesh, has announced that it will forgive debts worth about $5.6 billion. More than 21 million small farmers who own less than 2 hectares (5 acres) of land will benefit from the relief. That includes 700,000 farmers whose loans were already listed as non-performing by their banks. The loan waiver was a key campaign promise by the Bharatiya Janata Party of Prime Minister Narendra Modi, and aims to provide respite to farmers struggling to make ends meet. Related: India's generous maternity leave may be bad for women Bad farm loans are a major problem in India, and the government frequently bails out the agricultural sector -- most notably in 2008, when it wrote off around $17 billion in debt for 40 million farmers across the country. But the latest package has come under fire from India's central bank. An official at the Reserve Bank of India told local media last week that the government risked promoting a culture of "credit indiscipline." For now, however, millions of farmers can breathe a sigh of (debt) relief. CNNMoney (New Delhi) First published April 5, 2017: 12:19 PM ET
1491409111	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/05/middleeast/syria-sarin-chemical-weapons-explainer/index.html	What we know about Syria's chemical weapons - CNN.com	(CNN)Horrifying images and video show civilians -- including children -- struggling to breathe, foam coming from their mouths as they appear to die of asphyxiation after an airstrike on a rebel-held town in northwestern Syria on Tuesday. Syria's military has denied using chemical weapons and blamed rebels for the carnage, but activists say the regime is responsible for a chemical attack which killed at least 70 people. Russia, meanwhile, has blamed the deaths on a Syrian airstrike on a "terrorist" ammunition depot. It's not yet confirmed what chemical agent was involved in the suspected attack in Khan Sheikhoun, Idlib province. But early indicators point to the release of a nerve agent like Sarin. "The symptoms were pale skin, sweating, narrow or pin-eye pupils, very intense respiratory detachments. Those symptoms match the usage of Sarin," said a doctor in a hospital close to Khan Sheikhoun, who cannot be named for security reasons. How a chemical attack in Syria unfolded Does the Syrian regime have nerve agents? The regime of Syrian President Bashar al-Assad is supposed to have given up its chemical weapons stockpile, but not everyone is convinced. Before the war began in 2011, Syria had research and production facilities near Damascus, Aleppo, Homs, Latakia and Hama that turned out hundreds of tons of chemical agents a year, according to the US-based James Martin Center for Nonproliferation Studies and the Nuclear Threat Initiative, which catalogs the world's arsenals of weapons of mass destruction. Syria never signed the Chemical Weapons Convention, the current international treaty against the use of poison gas, but it did sign the 1925 Geneva Protocol, which banned the use of chemical and bacteriological warfare, according to the international Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW.) Experts from the agency were part of a UN team that found "clear and convincing evidence" that Sarin was delivered by surface-to-surface rockets "on a relatively large scale" in the Ghouta area of the Syrian capital Damascus in August 2013. The attack prompted Obama to ask Congress to authorize military action against Syria. Shortly after, Syria agreed to a Russian proposal to give up control of its chemical weapons, leading Obama to retreat from threats of military action. From October 2013, the OPCW oversaw the destruction of Syria's chemical weapon stockpile. But one Syrian general, who said he defected after he was ordered to use chemical agents, told CNN's Christiane Amanpour at the time that the regime would never give up its chemical stockpile. "The locations of most of the scientific research centers in Syria and the storage facilities are known and under surveillance, thus, he will give up those centers and facilities for sure without lying. That said, however, Bashar al-Assad will not give up the chemical stockpile," said Brig. Gen. Zaher al-Sakat in 2013. Could rebel forces have chemical weapons? Russia's defense ministry claimed on its Facebook page that a Syrian airstrike had hit a "terrorist" ammunition depot in the eastern outskirts of Khan Sheikhoun. The ministry said "terrorists had been transporting chemical munitions from this largest arsenal to the territory of Iraq." Syrian Deputy Foreign Minister Fayssal Mikdad similarly told al-Mayadeen TV that Syria had given the OPCW and United Nations information in recent weeks on the Jabhat al-Nusra terrorist group transporting toxic substances into Syria, state-run news agency SANA reported. But Dan Kaszeta, a chemical weapons specialist and managing director of Strongpoint Security, told CNN that the Russian version of events was "highly implausible." All the nerve agents used in the Syrian conflict so far have been binary nerve agents, he said, which are mixed from different components within a few days of use. This is done because of the difficulties of handling agents such as Sarin, which has a very short shelf life, he said. "Nerve agents are the result of a very expensive, exotic, industrial chemical process -- these are not something you just whip up," he said. The idea that the Syrian opposition would be able to build the covert supply chain to make a nerve agent and then would move it around and store it in a warehouse, rather than a bunker, makes no sense, Kaszeta said. "It's much more plausible that Assad, who's used nerve agents in the past, is using them again," he said. OPCW investigators have accused ISIS of using sulfur mustard, a blister agent, in Iraq and Syria. But Kaszeta said there was no comparison, since sulfur mustard -- widely used in Saddam Hussein's Iraq -- is much easier to come by, is far less lethal and has a long shelf life. Charles Lister, a senior fellow at the US-based Middle East Institute, also rejected the Russian account of what happened as "laughable." "Are we seriously meant to believe that the opposition has a latent chemical weapons capability, and yet somehow, it has only ever suffered the effects of its own weapons and failed to use them itself?" he said. What happened in Khan Sheikhoun "is an almost exact replication of what we saw in the summer of 2013," Lister told CNN, adding that it had targeted a key staging area for an opposition push into northern Hama late last month. Lister also highlighted the issue that all nerve agents known to be in Syria are binary weapons. "First of all, nobody in their right mind would ever store both both components of a binary nerve agent in the same building. And secondly, even if they were stored together and then targeted, blowing them up would not result in any active nerve agent -- it's chemically impossible," he said. What chemical agent was involved? This won't be known for sure until tests are carried out but medical experts report symptoms consistent with the use of nerve agents, which include Sarin. The World Health Organization says the victims' symptoms are consistent with exposure to nerve agents, pointing to "the apparent lack of external injuries" and "acute respiratory distress as the main cause of death." Doctors without Borders, or MSF, said a team providing support to the emergency department of Bab Al Hawa hospital in Idlib province had "confirmed that patients' symptoms are consistent with exposure to a neurotoxic agent such as Sarin gas." MSF teams who visited other hospitals in the area "reported that victims smelled of bleach, suggesting they had been exposed to chlorine," a news release said. "These reports strongly suggest that victims of the attack on Khan Sheikhoun were exposed to at least two different chemical agents." The OPCW says Syrian government forces have used chlorine as a weapon a number of times since 2013. Khaula Sawah, board member and former CEO of the Union of Medical Care and Relief Organizations (OUSSM), said her field team in Idlib had reported that while still unconfirmed, doctors believe -- based on the symptoms of the patients -- that some form of organophosphate nerve agent was used. "The symptoms rapidly developed within minutes, including redness of eyes, foaming at the mouth, contracted pupils, severe dyspnoea (labored breathing) or shortness of breath and suffocation," she told CNN. "The symptoms progressed so rapidly that fatality occurred within 10 minutes. If there were no supportive care or ICU, people were dying." The Syrian American Medical Society also said hospitals in the area around Khan Sheikhoun had "received patients who suffered symptoms indicative of an organophosphorus compounds agent, a category of toxic gases which includes Sarin." So what is Sarin? Sarin is a clear, colorless, tasteless and odorless liquid that was originally developed in 1938 in Germany as a pesticide. It was used in two terrorist attacks in Japan in 1994 and 1995. It's less toxic than nerve agent VX but it's extremely volatile. It mixes easily with water -- symptoms can be brought on by drinking or even touching a contaminated water supply. It can also contaminate food and clothing. Its effects depend on the degree and manner of exposure, says the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. In liquid form, symptoms are likely to appear a few minutes to a few hours after exposure, but the effect is almost instantaneous when it's an odorless gas. Then, victims can experience symptoms within seconds. Symptoms of low to moderate exposure include a watery nose, blurred vision, tightness in the chest, nausea, drowsiness and headaches. Exposure to large doses can lead to loss of consciousness, convulsions, paralysis and respiratory failure. Victims can die within 10 minutes.  
1491409098	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/05/entertainment/heath-ledger-documentary/index.html	Heath Ledger as you've never seen him - CNN.com	(CNN)Had he lived, Heath Ledger would have turned 38 years old Tuesday. Instead his fans received a gift: The first look at an intimate documentary about the late star. The trailer for "I Am Heath Ledger" debuted online Tuesday. The film, which is set to premiere at the Tribeca Film Festival on April 23, offers new glimpses into the life of the actor, who died from a prescription medication overdose in 2008 when he was 28. It also features interviews with those who knew the "Dark Knight" and "Brokeback Mountain" star best, including musician Ben Harper, director Ang Lee and Ledger's sister, Kate. "Heath was the most alive human," Harper says in the trailer. "And if it wasn't on the edge, it didn't interest him." The doc also shows Ledger, who loved filming video in his spare time, shooting with various cameras. "We're gonna go on a mission right now," Ledger says as he looks into one camera. "Yeah, so will you come with me?" The project is the result of a partnership between acclaimed filmmaker Derik Murray, Network Entertainment, and Spike TV. The film will get a limited run in theaters on May 3 and debut on Spike TV May 17.  
1491410213	http://www.cnn.com/2015/12/04/health/diseases-you-thought-were-gone/index.html	Diseases you thought were gone - CNN.com	Gwen and Terry Zwanziger's 17-year-old daughter Shannon died unexpectedly in 2014 after losing a battle with influenza. Their story is included in CNN Films' "Unseen Enemy," premiering Friday, April 7 at 9 p.m. ET/PT on CNN. (CNN)This year, the United States has recorded 16 cases of plague, while recent figures have revealed that in the UK, cases of "19th-century" diseases such as scurvy and scarlet fever are on the rise. Changes to our living conditions and the development of medicines have affected the rise and fall of diseases, but they seldom disappear. To date, smallpox remains the only disease to have ever been eradicated. Here are some often-forgotten diseases that still exist -- despite our best efforts to control them. Plague In the 14th century, plague -- known as the Black Death -- killed an estimated 60% of the European population. Plague is spread by fleas living on rodents, such as rats and squirrels, but the development vaccines and antibiotics, and improved living conditions, have curtailed the spread of the disease Plague is rare in developed countries today, with roughly two to 10 cases reported in the United States annually, where there have been 16 cases so far this year. But the disease persists elsewhere. The WHO reports 1,000 to 3,000 global cases of plague every year. Africa, South America and Asia have the greatest number of cases -- particularly Madagascar, Peru and India. Read: How do we still have plague? Rubella The virus, which is passed to babies in the womb from unvaccinated mothers, can cause multiple birth defects as well as fetal death when contracted by women during pregnancy. Rubella vaccinations first became available in 1970, helping many developed countries come close to eliminating the disease and in April 2015, the Americas became the first region to eliminate rubella, after a 15-year vaccination campaign. But the infection remains in countries with low immunization coverage, particularly in Africa and south-east Asia. An estimated 110,000 babies are born with Congenital Rubella Syndrome every year. Leprosy Leprosy is a contagious disease transmitted by prolonged contact with infected people. It causes damage to nerve and skin cells resulting in disfiguring sores and permanent disabilities. The first breakthrough in leprosy treatment came in 1945, with the drug dapsone, but bacteria soon became resistant. This lead to the development of a successful multidrug therapy in the 1970s. The number of global leprosy cases has dropped significantly in the last 30 years, from 5.2 million in 1985 -- but there were still 216,000 cases in 2013. The disease is still a problem in parts of India, Brazil and Indonesia where more than 80% of cases occur. Read: The dark history of America's forgotten leper colony Gout Gout is a type of arthritis caused by the build up of uric acid or urates -- a natural by-product of digestion -- inside joints. This can lead to pain, swelling and redness. First identified by the Egyptians, Gout was once known as the "disease of kings" because of its links to excessive food and alcohol consumption. Unhealthy lifestyles and obesity have caused dramatic increases of gout in developed countries, with the condition now affecting an estimated 8.3 million North Americans -- nearly 4% of the adult population -- according to one study. The prevalence of gout varies significantly around the world -- at 4.75% Greece has the highest rate in Europe, according to a 2010 study. Whooping cough Whopping cough, or pertussis, is an airborne infection that swells the airways. It causes intense coughing, with particularly serious effects for babies. Before the 1940s there were more than 200,000 cases of whooping cough in the United States each year, until widespread vaccination reduced new infections by 80%. But outbreaks still occur. In 2010, California suffered its worst outbreak in 60 years, with close to 1,500 cases and 10 deaths. There were an estimated 16 million global cases in 2008 -- 95% in developing countries -- killing about 195,000 children. Diphtheria This disease affects the nose and throat and is passed on by coughing or sneezing. It kills 5-10% of patients who catch it. It was once a major childhood killer. The United States recorded 206,000 cases in 1921, causing more than 15,000 deaths. Vaccination programs meant it declined rapidly, with only five cases of diphtheria reported in the United States in the last decade. But in the developing world it remains a problem. In 2011 nearly 5,000 cases of diphtheria were recorded globally, with many more likely unreported. It continues to be a problem in parts of Africa and Asia -- mostly due to poor vaccination coverage. Scarlet fever This disease is caused by bacteria found on the skin and throat, producing a distinctive pink-red rash. The bacteria is spread by sneezing and coughing, touching skin with infections such as impetigo, or sharing contaminated linen. There is still no vaccine. From 1840 to 1883, fatality rates of scarlet fever exceeded 30% in some parts of the U.S. and Europe. But from the 1950s, antibiotics and improved living conditions made the disease rare in developed countries. In 2014, more than 14,000 cases of Scarlet fever were reported in the United Kingdom -- the highest surge since the late 1960s -- and infections have continued in 2015. Globally, outbreaks of this rare disease continue to occur -- though rare -- with 1,500 cases and two fatalities reported in Hong Kong in 2011. TB Known as the "White Plague" as it ravaged 18th-century Europe, tuberculosis (TB) is now the world's biggest infectious killer, ahead of HIV. More than 9,400 people were infected in the United States in 2014. Globally, TB killed an estimated 1.5 million people in 2013, whilst 9 million developed the disease. TB is treatable but drug-resistant forms cause further challenges in controlling the disease. The infection is spread through the air, aided by overcrowded housing and poor ventilation. Strong immune systems can normally fight off the disease but TB takes hold in patients with weakened defenses -- particularly people with HIV. Read: Return of the 'White Plague' Rickets Rickets is a disease that softens and bends children's bones. Commonly caused by a lack of vitamin D and calcium, it's often thought of as a 19th-century condition. Autopsy studies in parts of the Netherlands showed that in the late 19th century, 80-90% of children had rickets, but improved living conditions in developed countries made the disease so rare that many governments stopped tracking it. Although there's a lack of comprehensive data on the global rates of rickets, experts believe that less time spent outdoors (sunlight is converted into Vitamin D) combined with inadequate Vitamin D and calcium in some diets, is causing it to make a comeback in developed countries. Polio Humans have been living with polio for thousands of years. The virus spreads through contact with infected feces or sneeze droplets, reaching the brain and spinal cord and causing paralysis in some cases. In the 1940s and 1950s, in the U.S. alone about 35,000 people annually became disabled because of polio. Effective vaccines were developed in the 1950s and 60s. When the Global Polio Eradication Initiative began in 1988, polio paralyzed more than 1,000 children worldwide every day. Since then, more than 2.5 billion children have been immunized, decreasing global polio cases by 99%. In 2015, just 51 cases of wild polio virus have been reported so far, all in Afghanistan and Pakistan. Read: Ending polio -- 'we're on the verge of making history'  
1491410192	http://www.cnn.com/2016/11/08/health/patient-zero-history-super-spreaders/index.html	The untold stories of 'patients zero' - CNN.com	Watch CNN Films' "Unseen Enemy," premiering Friday, April 7 at 9 p.m. ET/PT on CNN. (CNN)When a researcher's scrawling of the letter O was misinterpreted as a zero in reference to a HIV patient in the early 1980s, the provocative term "patient zero" was born. It triggered a wave of events in which the patient, Gaëtan Dugas, a French-Canadian flight attendant, was erroneously blamed for bringing the human immunodeficiency virus, or HIV, to the United States. Decades passed before research, published in the journal Nature last month, cleared Dugas' name and provided strong evidence that the virus emerged in the United States from a pre-existing Caribbean epidemic in or around 1970. Though Dugas' disturbing saga has been put to rest, the term "patient zero" lives on, and continues to create confusion and curiosity about how disease spreads. "Zero is a capacious word," Richard McKay, a historian at the University of Cambridge in England and a co-author of the Nature study, said last month. "It could mean nothing, but it can also mean the absolute beginning." Super-spreaders vs. super-shedders "Patient zero" is still frequently used to describe index cases -- the first documented cases of a disease observed or reported to health officials. Many scientists and public health officials are loath to identify those patients and avoid the term "patient zero" altogether, said Thomas Friedrich, an associate professor of pathobiological sciences at the University of Wisconsin-Madison School of Veterinary Medicine. "Identifying one person as the patient zero, on the one hand may give an incorrect impression about how the disease emerges in the first place and, on the other hand, insinuate that somebody should be blamed for this outbreak, when that's not really appropriate," Friedrich said. "Nonetheless, it's important scientifically and for people and public health to understand index cases so that we know how diseases are coming into a community and how to stop their spread." Some scientists argue that it's equally important to analyze primary cases -- the person or animal that first brings a bacterium or virus into a population. For many infectious-disease pandemics, the primary case will never be known, said Dr. Ian Lipkin, a professor of epidemiology and director of the Center for Infection and Immunity at Columbia University in New York. "It is not uncommon for infectious agents to percolate in the environment for years or even decades without detection," Lipkin said, adding that an agent could enter the human population in more than just one person. And even after an infectious agent crosses into the human population, some people are more capable of spreading it than others, he noted. "So it may make more sense to talk in terms of super-spreaders than patient zeroes," Lipkin said. "Super-spreaders may travel or engage in certain types of behaviors ... that result in transmission to large numbers of people." For instance, even though Dugas wasn't the patient zero of HIV, he still may have served as a super-spreader, Lipkin said. Still others might be super-shedders, individuals who shed many more types of the virus into the environment -- and not just through person-to-person contact -- than others. Whether they were truly patient zero, super-spreaders or super-shedders, here are the stories of six people who may have played a role in the spread of deadly diseases in the 20th and 21st centuries. The real Typhoid Mary One of the first-known examples of super-spreading, and maybe even super-shedding, was Mary Mallon. She became known as Typhoid Mary, said Dr. Richard Stein, a research scientist at New York University School of Medicine and adjunct assistant professor at City University of New York, who wrote the book "Super-Spreading in Infectious Diseases." "I'm still not sure whether she was only a super-spreader or whether she was also a super-shedder or possibly both," Stein said. Mallon, an Irish-born cook, appeared healthy as she prepared meals for the families she worked for in the early 1900s in New York. Soon after her meals were served, members of the households where she worked developed typhoid fever, a life-threatening illness caused by the bacterium Salmonella typhi. As more households where she worked developed typhoid fever, Mallon was soon identified as something of a patient zero, even though she never developed the symptoms. "There are these individuals, like so-called Typhoid Mary, who for one reason or another may be infected with a pathogen and not have that many symptoms but can shed that pathogen in a way that makes it infectious to other people," Friedrich said. Mallon was forced into quarantine on two occasions for a total of 26 years, during which she unsuccessfully sued the New York department of health, saying she didn't feel sick and therefore could not infect other people. She died in 1938. No one really knows whether Mallon was the true patient zero in the typhoid case or simply a super-spreader or super-shedder. After all, naming a patient zero remains tricky. "I can't even think of a time when we've actually known an index case," said Dr. Bertram Jacobs, director and professor of virology at Arizona State University's School of Life Sciences. The closest we can come is probably the SARS epidemic, he said. The spread of SARS Scientists have traced a serious super-spreading event during the 2003 global outbreak of SARS to one doctor and one night that he spent in a Hong Kong hotel, according to a World Health Organization bulletin (PDF). Dr. Liu Jianlun, a 64-year-old medical doctor from southern China's Guangdong province, was ill during his stay at the hotel and may have transferred the virus to at least 16 other guests staying on the same floor, according to the bulletin. Coincidentally, Liu stayed in room 911 on the ninth floor of the Metropole Hotel. "You wouldn't call him 'patient zero,' but if you consider his impact in terms of the outbreak, he was critical in the spread of the disease," said Lipkin, who received the International Science and Technology Cooperation Award this year for assisting the WHO and the People's Republic of China during the height of the SARS outbreak.  The other hotel guests who were exposed to the virus probably traveled to other countries after being infected. In less than four months, about 4,000 cases and 550 deaths from SARS could be traced to Liu's stay in Hong Kong. How was Liu infected with SARS to begin with? The hospital where he worked treated SARS, and Liu might have come into contact with the virus through a patient. In Guangdong, it was believed that a farmer first developed SARS after coming in contact with the virus through an animal. Such diseases that are spread from animals are called zoonotic. "For many zoonotic infectious diseases, the first step involves the species jump, and then if the virus is able to be transmitted directly among humans and no longer needs the animal reservoir for this, it has the potential to unleash an epidemic," Stein said. "I think that, exploring this from a global perspective, that very first patient would be patient zero." 'Contagion' in real life SARS is believed to have originated in bat species and then spread to other animals, such as civet cats, before infecting humans in China, according to the WHO. "In the process of adapting from one species to the next, you have the spread of disease," Lipkin said, who served as senior technical adviser during the production of the 2011 medical thriller "Contagion." Some of the scenes in the film mirror his memories of Beijing when he assisted in managing the SARS outbreak, Lipkin said. In the film, a fictional deadly virus sweeps the world after migrating from a dead pig to a chef that handles it. About 60% of all existing human infectious diseases are zoonotic, said Stein, the research scientist at New York University. In other words, there are numerous microorganisms in nature that infect animals -- and some of these same microorganisms infect humans. "It was predicted that by 2020, about 10 to 40 new viruses might emerge in humans," Stein said, citing a 2008 study published in the journal Proceedings of the Royal Society B.  "There are plenty of potential patient zeroes out there that get infected with stuff," said University of Wisconsin-Madison's Friedrich. "What's preventing a new pandemic is not so much that animal viruses just can not infect humans. In fact, the more we look, the more we see that people do get infected with animal viruses all the time," he said. The key to an outbreak, Friedrich said, is for those viruses to be transmitted from a single person to more people. That's exactly what H5N1 avian flu, or bird flu, did. A new virus emerges In 2004, a 6-year-old boy named Captain Boonmanuch became the first confirmed casualty of bird flu in Thailand as the virus spread across Asia, USA Today reported. Captain might not have been patient zero, but his family recalled that before falling ill, the youngster scooped up a squawking chicken and carried it to his uncle's home. It is believed that the chicken shed the avian flu virus during this encounter, possibly infecting Captain and others. Between 2003 and 2016, a total of 856 cases of human infections with H5N1 viruses worldwide have been documented, and there have been 452 deaths, according to the WHO (PDF). "New epidemics that emerge in humans often come from contact with animal diseases," Jacobs said. "The viruses that really circulate in humans turn out mostly to be reassortants between viruses, usually from birds and other human viruses." A reassortant is the virus that emerges when the genetic material from two or more other viruses infecting a single human or animal host mix together. That mixing is often referred to as a reassortment event, which occurs frequently in nature. "Avian influenza viruses don't replicate well in humans, human influenza viruses don't replicate well in birds, but if a bird virus and a human virus gets into a pig, you can have reassortment and get totally new strains out," Jacobs said. That's what happened in 2009 with another type of flu -- H1N1 swine flu -- that took the world by storm. A boy who survived swine flu H1N1 influenza emerged in humans to cause a pandemic in 1918, Friedrich said, and then a similar pandemic hit the world in 2009. It is believed that, leading up to the 2009 pandemic, pigs became infected with a few different viruses. A reassortment resulted in an H1N1 strain that had some eerie genetic resemblances to the 1918 virus, Friedrich said. The resulting outbreak serves as an example of how new flu viruses might enter the human population, Friedrich said. "For the most recent H1N1, it definitely seems like it came from pigs, (even though) they're ultimately bird viruses," Friedrich said. "The term that people use in the flu world is that pigs are 'mixing vessels,' in which bird viruses and mammal viruses can mix together and create new combinations that are more likely to infect people than just straight-up bird viruses," Friedrich explained. Edgar Hernandez was a 5-year-old living in the Mexican town of La Gloria when doctors identified him as the earliest documented case of swine flu in the 2009 outbreak. Edgar survived the illness, which his mother believed developed due to a pig in the neighborhood. "With these index cases, it's not just getting infected with an animal virus, but rather, that virus probably has to do things to become transmissible in people, and it has to get out of that first person and get into other people to really become an outbreak," Friedrich said. "Some viruses can do that, and some can't. Some can do it but only weakly, and they die out, and some do it really well, and then those become the outbreaks that we hear about." Emile and Ebola One virus long known to aggressively pass from human to human, like a piton in a dangerous race, is Ebola. Ebola can be introduced into the human population through close contact with the blood, secretions, organs and other bodily fluids of infected animals, such as fruit bats, monkeys or even forest antelope, according to the WHO. A 2-year-old boy was the suspected first case of the recent Ebola outbreak, suggesting that there was a "single introduction of the virus into the human population," according to a study published in the New England Journal of Medicine in 2014. Emile Ouamouno was a toddler living in the southern Guinea village of Meliandou when he suddenly developed fever, vomiting and severe diarrhea in December 2013. Officials said he might have contracted the disease from a bat. He died four days after his symptoms emerged. Within a month, his grandmother, mother and 3-year-old sister died from the disease as well. As in previous Ebola outbreaks, the virus continued to spread through contact with the body and with human bodily fluids, possibly even after the human died, said Stein, the research scientist at New York University. "Ebola is interesting, because for this infectious disease, studies found that unsafe burial practices, which involve washing and preparing the body of the deceased, apparently contributed to the infection of many people who were participating in this cultural practice," Stein said, noting that people could have dispersed a high number of viruses before dying, as well. 'In the wrong place at the wrong time' MERS, Middle East respiratory syndrome, is a fierce virus identified in Saudi Arabia in 2012 and named in 2013. Though scientists are still studying the origins of the virus, they know that camels were likely to be an animal source of MERS infection in humans, according to the WHO, which has been notified of at least 1,813 cases of MERS infections since 2012. Last year, there was a MERS outbreak in South Korea, and a 68-year-old man with an extensive travel history was reported to be the so-called patient zero. The man traveled to Bahrain, the United Arab Emirates, Saudi Arabia and Qatar before returning to South Korea. He was not ill with symptoms during his travels, according to the WHO, but once he fell ill, he went to the Samsung Medical Center in Seoul. According to the the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, the time between being exposed to MERS and experiencing symptoms can range from two to 14 days. The man may have transmitted MERS to 28 other people before arriving at the hospital, according to a study published in The Lancet in July. A patient among them who subsequently sought care may have transmitted MERS to an additional 82 people in the hospital. However, it's still important to keep in mind that "it's very difficult for us to identify who is a cardinal case in an outbreak," said Lipkin, the epidemiologist at Columbia University. "There are rare examples of when we do see that happen, like in the Ebola outbreak, because we followed it in real time, but when you try to reconstruct after the fact, it's easy to be misled." And being misled isn't good for science or humanity, said Jacobs, the virologist at Arizona State University. "As humans, we sort of want to make tight stories about things, and sometimes that involves blaming or saying, 'Oh, this person started the epidemic,' " Jacobs said. "With history, at least the history of infectious diseases, it's not that tight. It's not that clean. It's very rare that we can say, 'This person did it; this person started it.' Even if they did, most of the time, they weren't doing anything consciously to start an epidemic. They happened to be in the wrong place at the wrong time."  
1491410183	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/05/middleeast/syria-sarin-chemical-weapons-explainer/index.html	What we know about Syria's chemical weapons - CNN.com	(CNN)Horrifying images and video show civilians -- including children -- struggling to breathe, foam coming from their mouths as they appear to die of asphyxiation after an airstrike on a rebel-held town in northwestern Syria on Tuesday. Syria's military has denied using chemical weapons and blamed rebels for the carnage, but activists say the regime is responsible for a chemical attack which killed at least 70 people. Russia, meanwhile, has blamed the deaths on a Syrian airstrike on a "terrorist" ammunition depot. It's not yet confirmed what chemical agent was involved in the suspected attack in Khan Sheikhoun, Idlib province. But early indicators point to the release of a nerve agent like Sarin. "The symptoms were pale skin, sweating, narrow or pin-eye pupils, very intense respiratory detachments. Those symptoms match the usage of Sarin," said a doctor in a hospital close to Khan Sheikhoun, who cannot be named for security reasons. How a chemical attack in Syria unfolded Does the Syrian regime have nerve agents? The regime of Syrian President Bashar al-Assad is supposed to have given up its chemical weapons stockpile, but not everyone is convinced. Before the war began in 2011, Syria had research and production facilities near Damascus, Aleppo, Homs, Latakia and Hama that turned out hundreds of tons of chemical agents a year, according to the US-based James Martin Center for Nonproliferation Studies and the Nuclear Threat Initiative, which catalogs the world's arsenals of weapons of mass destruction. Syria never signed the Chemical Weapons Convention, the current international treaty against the use of poison gas, but it did sign the 1925 Geneva Protocol, which banned the use of chemical and bacteriological warfare, according to the international Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW.) Experts from the agency were part of a UN team that found "clear and convincing evidence" that Sarin was delivered by surface-to-surface rockets "on a relatively large scale" in the Ghouta area of the Syrian capital Damascus in August 2013. The attack prompted Obama to ask Congress to authorize military action against Syria. Shortly after, Syria agreed to a Russian proposal to give up control of its chemical weapons, leading Obama to retreat from threats of military action. From October 2013, the OPCW oversaw the destruction of Syria's chemical weapon stockpile. But one Syrian general, who said he defected after he was ordered to use chemical agents, told CNN's Christiane Amanpour at the time that the regime would never give up its chemical stockpile. "The locations of most of the scientific research centers in Syria and the storage facilities are known and under surveillance, thus, he will give up those centers and facilities for sure without lying. That said, however, Bashar al-Assad will not give up the chemical stockpile," said Brig. Gen. Zaher al-Sakat in 2013. Could rebel forces have chemical weapons? Russia's defense ministry claimed on its Facebook page that a Syrian airstrike had hit a "terrorist" ammunition depot in the eastern outskirts of Khan Sheikhoun. The ministry said "terrorists had been transporting chemical munitions from this largest arsenal to the territory of Iraq." Syrian Deputy Foreign Minister Fayssal Mikdad similarly told al-Mayadeen TV that Syria had given the OPCW and United Nations information in recent weeks on the Jabhat al-Nusra terrorist group transporting toxic substances into Syria, state-run news agency SANA reported. But Dan Kaszeta, a chemical weapons specialist and managing director of Strongpoint Security, told CNN that the Russian version of events was "highly implausible." All the nerve agents used in the Syrian conflict so far have been binary nerve agents, he said, which are mixed from different components within a few days of use. This is done because of the difficulties of handling agents such as Sarin, which has a very short shelf life, he said. "Nerve agents are the result of a very expensive, exotic, industrial chemical process -- these are not something you just whip up," he said. The idea that the Syrian opposition would be able to build the covert supply chain to make a nerve agent and then would move it around and store it in a warehouse, rather than a bunker, makes no sense, Kaszeta said. "It's much more plausible that Assad, who's used nerve agents in the past, is using them again," he said. OPCW investigators have accused ISIS of using sulfur mustard, a blister agent, in Iraq and Syria. But Kaszeta said there was no comparison, since sulfur mustard -- widely used in Saddam Hussein's Iraq -- is much easier to come by, is far less lethal and has a long shelf life. Charles Lister, a senior fellow at the US-based Middle East Institute, also rejected the Russian account of what happened as "laughable." "Are we seriously meant to believe that the opposition has a latent chemical weapons capability, and yet somehow, it has only ever suffered the effects of its own weapons and failed to use them itself?" he said. What happened in Khan Sheikhoun "is an almost exact replication of what we saw in the summer of 2013," Lister told CNN, adding that it had targeted a key staging area for an opposition push into northern Hama late last month. Lister also highlighted the issue that all nerve agents known to be in Syria are binary weapons. "First of all, nobody in their right mind would ever store both both components of a binary nerve agent in the same building. And secondly, even if they were stored together and then targeted, blowing them up would not result in any active nerve agent -- it's chemically impossible," he said. What chemical agent was involved? This won't be known for sure until tests are carried out but medical experts report symptoms consistent with the use of nerve agents, which include Sarin. The World Health Organization says the victims' symptoms are consistent with exposure to nerve agents, pointing to "the apparent lack of external injuries" and "acute respiratory distress as the main cause of death." Doctors without Borders, or MSF, said a team providing support to the emergency department of Bab Al Hawa hospital in Idlib province had "confirmed that patients' symptoms are consistent with exposure to a neurotoxic agent such as Sarin gas." MSF teams who visited other hospitals in the area "reported that victims smelled of bleach, suggesting they had been exposed to chlorine," a news release said. "These reports strongly suggest that victims of the attack on Khan Sheikhoun were exposed to at least two different chemical agents." A UN investigation last year found two instances where regime forces had used chlorine as a chemical weapon. Syria denied the claim. Khaula Sawah, board member and former CEO of the Union of Medical Care and Relief Organizations (OUSSM), said her field team in Idlib had reported that while still unconfirmed, doctors believe -- based on the symptoms of the patients -- that some form of organophosphate nerve agent was used. "The symptoms rapidly developed within minutes, including redness of eyes, foaming at the mouth, contracted pupils, severe dyspnoea (labored breathing) or shortness of breath and suffocation," she told CNN. "The symptoms progressed so rapidly that fatality occurred within 10 minutes. If there were no supportive care or ICU, people were dying." The Syrian American Medical Society also said hospitals in the area around Khan Sheikhoun had "received patients who suffered symptoms indicative of an organophosphorus compounds agent, a category of toxic gases which includes Sarin." So what is Sarin? Sarin is a clear, colorless, tasteless and odorless liquid that was originally developed in 1938 in Germany as a pesticide. It was used in two terrorist attacks in Japan in 1994 and 1995. It's less toxic than nerve agent VX but it's extremely volatile. It mixes easily with water -- symptoms can be brought on by drinking or even touching a contaminated water supply. It can also contaminate food and clothing. Its effects depend on the degree and manner of exposure, says the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. In liquid form, symptoms are likely to appear a few minutes to a few hours after exposure, but the effect is almost instantaneous when it's an odorless gas. Then, victims can experience symptoms within seconds. Symptoms of low to moderate exposure include a watery nose, blurred vision, tightness in the chest, nausea, drowsiness and headaches. Exposure to large doses can lead to loss of consciousness, convulsions, paralysis and respiratory failure. Victims can die within 10 minutes.  
1491410121	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/05/middleeast/idlib-syria-attack/index.html	Syria chemical attack victims gassed as they slept - CNN.com	This story contains graphic imagery. (CNN)Russian claims that a regime airstrike on a "terrorist" ammunition depot caused the deaths of at least 70 people in northern Syria have been rejected, as victims described the aftermath of chemical bombs dropped from planes. International condemnation mounted on Wednesday over what appeared to be a targeted chemical attack on a rebel-held town in Idlib province, one of the deadliest since the Syrian war began six years ago. The White House and the UK blamed the regime of President Bashar al-Assad for the outrage, which caused the deaths of at least 10 children, some asleep in their beds when the attack struck at dawn. The World Health Organization said victims bore the signs of exposure to nerve agents, and Amnesty International said evidence pointed to an "air-launched chemical attack." International agencies were working to establish the provenance of the agents used in the strike. Russia claimed the deaths were caused by gas released when a regime airstrike hit a chemical weapons factory on the ground. But victims being treated in a hospital on the Turkish side of the border told a CNN team they saw chemical bombs being dropped from planes. Key developments Dozens of victims have been taken to Turkey for treatment. The attack coincided with a two-day meeting in Brussels on Syria's future. UK Foreign Secretary Boris Johnson calls attack a 'barbaric act.' Medical experts and US say attack likely result of a nerve agent, like sarin gas. UN Security Council holds emergency meeting. The Russian defense ministry claimed on its Facebook page that a Syrian airstrike hit "workshops, which produced chemical warfare munitions" in the eastern outskirts of Khan Sheikhoun. It said that "terrorists" had been transporting the chemical munitions from its largest arsenal to Iraq. But a chemical weapons expert, Col. Hamish de Bretton-Gordon, told BBC Radio 4 that all signs showed the chemical used was sarin gas and that Russia's versions of events was "completely unsustainable." "I think this is pretty fanciful and no doubt the Russians trying to protect their allies. Axiomatically, if you blow up sarin, you destroy it," he said. Hours after the attack, several people were injured when an airstrike hit near a hospital in the same town, where victims from the earlier attack were being treated, the Aleppo Media Center activist group reported. The Syrian Civil Defense rescue group, known as the White Helmets, said the hospital was knocked out of service. Victim: 'I don't know if my family is dead or alive' Around 25 victims of the attack were being treated Wednesday at the Reyhanli Hospital in southern Turkey near the Syrian border. Several said that they saw a plane drop chemical bombs. Mazin Yusif, a 13-year-old-boy, broke down in tears as he spoke of what happened. "At six thirty in the morning, the plane struck. I ran up on our roof and saw that the strike was in front of my grandfather's house," he told CNN at the hospital. He said he ran toward the house and found his grandfather slumped over. He ran outside to call for help. "I got dizzy and then fainted in front of my grandfather's garage. I next found myself here in this hospital, naked in a bed." The boy's grandmother, 55-year-old Aisha al-Tilawi, said she saw blue and yellow after the plane dropped the chemical-laden bomb. "We started choking, felt dizzy, then fainted. Mazin was trying to wake up his grandfather. Three of my family died," she said, lying in bed with an oxygen mask on her face. Another victim, 31-year-old Ahmed Abdel Rahim, stared vacantly from his hospital bed as he explained he was hit with a poisonous substance carried by three rockets. "I was in my house. I had difficulty breathing, but I feel better now. But I did throw up after getting to the hospital. I don't know if my family is dead or alive. I don't know anything," he said. Worldwide condemnation The World Health Organization said some victims showed symptoms consistent with exposure to a category of chemicals that includes nerve agents. That conclusion was supported by Amnesty International, which said victims were "very likely" to have been exposed to a compound such as sarin. The Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons said it was gathering evidence about the attack. CNN saw a mobile laboratory provided by Turkish authorities at the Syrian border. Speaking at a high-level meeting in Brussels on the future of Syria, the UK's Johnson pointed the finger firmly at the Syrian regime. "All the evidence I have seen suggests that it was the Assad regime who did it, in full knowledge they were using illegal weapons in a barbaric attack on their own people," Johnson said. Assad's military has repeatedly denied using chemical weapons and consistently blames "terrorist" groups when chemical attacks are reported. But many of these are delivered through airstrikes, and no rebel or terrorist group in Syria is believed to have the capacity to carry out aerial bombardments. A UN investigation in August last year found that chemical weapons had been used in Syria, both by the national air force and ISIS militants. It found two instances where regime forces had used chlorine as a chemical weapon, and one where ISIS had used mustard gas between 2014 and 2015. The Syrian Coalition, an umbrella opposition group, compared the suspected chemical attack with one in Eastern Ghouta in 2013 "that the international community allowed to pass without accountability or punishment." A UN report found that the nerve agent sarin gas had been used to kill civilians in that attack, in which activists say around 1,400 people were killed. UN emergency meeting At an emergency meeting of the UN Security Council in New York, western powers strongly criticized Syria. US ambassador and council president, Nikki Hayley, gave an impassioned call to action, holding up photographs of children foaming at the mouth as evidence of the attack. "If Russia has the influence in Syria that it claims to have, we need to see them use it. We need to see them put an end to these horrific acts. How many more children have to die before Russia cares?" UK ambassador Matthew Rycroft denounced Russia for supporting Assad. "They reduced Aleppo to ruins and displaced hundreds of thousands of men women and children all in the name of fighting terrorism. And what does Russia get as repayment? Assad humiliates Russia in the eyes of the world by intensifying his attacks, by reducing the Astana ceasefire to rubble," he said, referring to Russia-brokered negotiations. Russia, Syria's most powerful ally, made clear it would not support a resolution put forward by the US, UK and France, which condemned the attack and required Syria to provide flight logs for Tuesday, the day of the attack. Russia has used its veto power as a permanent member of the Security Council at least seven times on Syrian resolutions. Syria's Deputy UN Ambassador Mounzer Mounzer flatly denied the reports, blaming "terrorist groups" for the dozens of deaths. "Syria also reaffirms that the Syrian Arab Army does not have any form or type of chemical weapons. We have never used them and we will never use them," he said. CNN's Ben Wedeman, Tamara Qiblawi, Eyad Kourdi, Lindsay Isaac, Onur Cakir, Richard Roth and Milena Veselinovic contributed to this report. 
1491410093	http://www.cnn.com/2015/07/20/health/vaccines-fast-facts/index.html	Vaccines Fast Facts - CNN.com	CNN Films' "Unseen Enemy," premieres Friday, April 7 at 9 p.m. ET/PT on CNN. (CNN)Here's a look at information and statistics concerning vaccines in the United States. Facts: There are 14 different vaccines that are recommended for children between birth and age six, including those for diphtheria, pertussis, tetanus, influenza, measles, mumps and rubella. For more than 100 years, there has been public discord regarding vaccines based on issues like individual rights, religious freedoms, distrust of government and the effects that vaccines may have on the health of children. Exemptions to vaccines fall into three general categories: medical, religious and philosophical. Median vaccination coverage was more than 94% for children entering kindergarten during the 2015-2016 school year, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). As of August 2016, 47 states and the District of Columbia allow religious exemptions from vaccines. As of August 2016, 18 states allow philosophical (non-spiritual) exemptions. Missouri's philosophical exemption only applies to daycare, preschool and nursery school. Two states - Vermont and California - passed laws in 2015 that repeal exemptions for parents who do not want their children vaccinated on the basis of personal philosophy. While the California law bans both philosophical and religious exemptions, the Vermont law only repeals philosophical exemptions. Timeline: 1855 - Massachusetts mandates that school children are to be vaccinated (only the smallpox vaccine is available at the time). February 20, 1905 - In Jacobson v. Massachusetts, the US Supreme Court upholds the State's right to compel immunizing against smallpox. November 13, 1922 - The US Supreme Court denies any constitutional violation in Zucht v. King in which Rosalyn Zucht believes that requiring vaccines violates her right to liberty without due process. The High Court opines that city ordinances that require vaccinations for children to attend school are a "discretion required for the protection of the public health." 1952 - Dr. Jonas Salk and his team develop a vaccine for polio. A nationwide trial leads to the vaccine being declared in 1955 to be safe and effective. 1963 - The first measles vaccine is released. 1983 - A schedule for active immunizations is recommended by the CDC. March 19, 1992 - Rolling Stone publishes an article by Tom Curtis, "The Origin of AIDS," which presents a theory that ties HIV/AIDS to polio vaccines. Curtis writes that in the late 1950s, during a vaccination campaign in Africa, at least 325,000 people were immunized with a contaminated polio vaccine. The article alleges that the vaccine may have been contaminated with a monkey virus and is the cause of the human immunodeficiency virus, later known as HIV/AIDS. August 10, 1993 - Congress passes the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act which creates the Vaccines for Children Program, providing qualified children free vaccines. December 9, 1993 - Rolling Stone publishes an update to the Curtis article, clarifying that his theory was not fact, and Rolling Stone did not mean to suggest there was any scientific proof to support it, and the magazine regrets any damage caused by the article. 1998 - British researcher Andrew Wakefield and 12 other authors publish a paper stating they had evidence that linked the vaccination for Measles, Mumps and Rubella (MMR) to autism. They claim they discovered the measles virus in the digestive systems of autistic children who were given the measles, mumps and rubella (MMR) vaccine. The publication leads to a widespread increase in the number of parents choosing not to vaccinate their children for fear of its link to autism. 2000 - The CDC declares the United States has achieved measles elimination, defined as "the absence of continuous disease transmission for 12 months or more in a specific geographic area." 2004 - Co-authors of the Wakefield study begin removing their names from the article when they discover Wakefield had been paid by lawyers representing parents who planned to sue vaccine manufacturers. February 2010 - The Lancet, the British medical journal that published Wakefield's study, officially retracts the article. Britain also revokes Wakefield's medical license. 2011 - Investigative reporter Brian Deer writes a series of articles in the British Medical Journal (BMJ) exposing Wakefield's fraud. The articles state that he used distorted data and falsified medical histories of children that may have led to an unfounded relationship between vaccines and the development of autism. 2011 - The US Public Health Service finds that 63% of parents who refuse and delay vaccines do so for fear their children could have serious side effects. 2014 - The CDC reports the highest number of cases at 668 since declaring measles eliminated in 2000. May 14, 2014 - The Institute of Medicine releases a report "rejecting a causal relationship between the MMR vaccine and autism." June 17, 2014 - After analyzing 10 studies, all of which looked at whether there was a link between vaccines and autism and involved a total of over one million children, the University of Sydney publishes a report saying there is no correlation between vaccinations and the development of autism. December 2014 - A measles outbreak occurs at Disneyland in California. 2015 - In the wake of the theme park outbreak, 189 cases of measles are reported in 24 states and Washington, DC. February 2015 - Advocacy group Autism Speaks releases a statement, "Over the last two decades, extensive research has asked whether there is any link between childhood vaccinations and autism. The results of this research are clear: Vaccines do not cause autism. We urge that all children be fully vaccinated." May 28, 2015 - Vermont Gov. Peter Shumlin signs a bill removing the philosophical exemption from the state's vaccination law. Parents may still request exemptions for medical or religious reasons. The law goes into effect on July 1, 2016. June 30, 2015 - California Gov. Jerry Brown signs legislation closing the "vaccine exemption loophole," by eliminating any personal or religious exemptions for immunizing children who attend school. The law takes effect on July 1, 2016. January-April 2016 - The CDC reports 10 cases of the measles in four states: California, Georgia, Tennessee, and Texas. January 10, 2017 - Notable vaccine skeptic Robert F. Kennedy, Jr. meets with President-elect Donald Trump. Afterwards, Kennedy tells reporters he agreed to chair a commission on "vaccination safety and scientific integrity." A Trump spokeswoman later says that no decision has been made about setting up a commission on autism.  
1491410085	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/05/entertainment/heath-ledger-documentary/index.html	Heath Ledger as you've never seen him - CNN.com	(CNN)Had he lived, Heath Ledger would have turned 38 years old Tuesday. Instead his fans received a gift: The first look at an intimate documentary about the late star. The trailer for "I Am Heath Ledger" debuted online Tuesday. The film, which is set to premiere at the Tribeca Film Festival on April 23, offers new glimpses into the life of the actor, who died from a prescription medication overdose in 2008 when he was 28. It also features interviews with those who knew the "Dark Knight" and "Brokeback Mountain" star best, including musician Ben Harper, director Ang Lee and Ledger's sister, Kate. "Heath was the most alive human," Harper says in the trailer. "And if it wasn't on the edge, it didn't interest him." The doc also shows Ledger, who loved filming video in his spare time, shooting with various cameras. "We're gonna go on a mission right now," Ledger says as he looks into one camera. "Yeah, so will you come with me?" The project is the result of a partnership between acclaimed filmmaker Derik Murray, Network Entertainment, and Spike TV. The film will get a limited run in theaters on May 3 and debut on Spike TV May 17.  
1491410074	http://www.cnn.com/2016/09/29/health/measles-eliminated-in-the-americas/index.html	The Americas are free of measles, WHO says - CNN.com	CNN Films' "Unseen Enemy," premieres Friday, April 7 at 9 p.m. ET/PT on CNN. (CNN)An effort spanning two decades has resulted in a global first: The Americas have eliminated measles, the World Health Organization said this week. The battle was won through mass vaccination to prevent the viral disease, which can cause severe health problems including pneumonia, blindness, brain swelling and even death. Measles affects primarily children. Symptoms include high fever, generalized rash all over the body, stuffy nose and reddened eyes. Considered one of the most contagious diseases, the measles virus can be transmitted through contact with the secretions or breathing airborne droplets from an infected person. Children who are malnourished and people with weakened immune systems are more like to experience serious complications including encephalitis, severe diarrhea and ear infections. A disease is declared eliminated when there has been no transmission is a specific geographic region for a year or more, according to the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Once elimination is achieved in every region of the world, eradication is declared. Before the start of a vaccination campaign in 1980, measles caused 101,800 deaths in the Americas for the years 1971 through 1979. Worldwide, measles resulted in nearly 2.6 million deaths annually prior to 1980. As a result of global efforts, only 244,704 measles cases were reported worldwide in 2015, more than half of them in Africa and Asia. This historic milestone would never have been possible without access to life-saving vaccines, said Carissa F. Etienne, director of the Pan American Health Organization, a regional office of the WHO. Measles is the fifth vaccine-preventable disease to be eliminated from the Americas, according to the World Health Organization. The region eradicated smallpox in 1971, poliomyelitis in 1994, and rubella and congenital rubella syndrome in 2015. The last endemic, meaning locally infected, case of measles was reported in the Americas in 2002, but imported cases have arrived in some countries in the region. Regional health organizations soldiered on, continuing their vaccination campaign and vigilance. After that, there was a separate outbreak in Brazil in 2013 that lasted well into 2015. Now, to maintain measles elimination, it is recommended that all countries in the region strengthen their surveillance efforts and maintain immunity through vaccination. "We can not become complacent with this achievement," Etienne said. "Measles still circulates widely in other parts of the world, and so we must be prepared to respond to imported cases."  
1491410056	http://www.cnn.com/2016/08/23/health/virus-hunters-bat-cave-south-africa/index.html	The virus hunters in search of the next outbreak - CNN.com	Watch CNN Films' "Unseen Enemy," premiering Friday, April 7 at 9 p.m. ET/PT on CNN. (CNN)It is a slow and cumbersome descent hindered by head-to-toe protective suits. A wooden ladder dips down the side, as two researchers in white suits and respirators make their way into Grootboom cave in South Africa. The suits make the journey more cumbersome, but they are the only things standing between safety and exposure. Inside the cave, thousands of bats either cling tightly to the walls or fly around in bunches. Any number of them could contain deadly pathogens. Without the suits, the researchers are vulnerable to any potential zoonotic diseases the bats could be harboring, which could transmit from animals into humans. In this particular part of the cave are long-fingered bats. Wanda Markotter, a researcher with the University of Pretoria, catches ones inside a net and slowly stretches out its wing. "This specific species has been implicated in some of the rabies-related viruses," Markotter says. "They are in high-population densities, and people are going to come in close contact with them." That's the other important part about this location. This is not some remote cave; this is only miles away from the densely populated of city of Johannesburg. "There are 1,240 species [of bats] worldwide," Markotter says. "So they represent a big group of mammals and that's why we probably find a lot of viruses in them." Researchers are tracking animals here in South Africa, and all around the world, as a form of early-warning system for diseases that could come to humans. It is widely believed, for instance, that the first cases of Ebola began with a bat. In 2014, West Africa saw an unprecedented outbreak of the Ebola virus, with cases concentrated in Sierra Leone, Liberia, and Guinea. The disease was first discovered in 1976 in what is now the Democratic Republic of Congo and there have been multiple outbreaks since that were well-controlled, but today things are more challenging. In a time where international travel has connected the world more than ever before, it takes a coordinated, global effort to prevent a widespread outbreak -- as the 2014 outbreak showed us. Much of that coordination happens at the headquarters of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in Atlanta, Georgia. The CDC oversees 10 global disease detection centers around the world, including in South Africa, where constant monitoring is taking place. "We were tracking almost 300 infectious disease outbreaks of concern in 145 countries," says Dr. Jordan Tappero, director of the Global Health Protection Center at CDC. This was during a 2-year period. "Only about 30% of countries even self-report [and] are able to prevent, detect, and respond to infectious disease outbreaks," Tappero says. "We are working around the world to try and improve capacity so that we have partners everywhere to respond quickly." That monitoring starts with teams on the ground in caves like Grootboom. The team now crawls through a narrow gap to reach a difference chamber, where different species of bats with other potential pathogens live. Each bat has the potential to carry rabies, Marburg, even Ebola. These are some of the planet's deadliest, but least understood, viruses. The risk is justified by the importance of the work as it is in the interest of public health, says Markotter. "If you don't know what's in the animals, you won't be able to identify a human outbreak quickly," she says. "Most of the time we only respond when there are lots of human deaths and we don't know where the virus came from, or where the pathogen came from." Outside the mouth of the cave, a makeshift lab comes to life under a white pop-up tent. Bats collected from various parts of the cave are tested, samples are collected from their mouths, fur, and wings and everything is meticulously recorded. This is all part of the constant monitoring and early warning systems. If the team knows what's circulating in the bats, they can flag it and alert the population to take precautions, or watch for certain symptoms. Their efforts will matter to keep this closely-connected world healthy. CNN's David McKenzie and Brent Swails contributed to this report. 
1491410038	http://money.cnn.com/2017/04/05/news/economy/india-farmers-loan-debt-canceled/index.html	India wipes out debt worth $5 billion for 21 million small farmers - Apr. 5, 2017	See two million knots turn into a carpet Millions of Indian farmers who borrowed from banks to finance their crops no longer have to pay their loans back. The country's biggest state, Uttar Pradesh, has announced that it will forgive debts worth about $5.6 billion. More than 21 million small farmers who own less than 2 hectares (5 acres) of land will benefit from the relief. That includes 700,000 farmers whose loans were already listed as non-performing by their banks. The loan waiver was a key campaign promise by the Bharatiya Janata Party of Prime Minister Narendra Modi, and aims to provide respite to farmers struggling to make ends meet. Related: India's generous maternity leave may be bad for women Bad farm loans are a major problem in India, and the government frequently bails out the agricultural sector -- most notably in 2008, when it wrote off around $17 billion in debt for 40 million farmers across the country. But the latest package has come under fire from India's central bank. An official at the Reserve Bank of India told local media last week that the government risked promoting a culture of "credit indiscipline." For now, however, millions of farmers can breathe a sigh of (debt) relief. CNNMoney (New Delhi) First published April 5, 2017: 12:19 PM ET
1491410036	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/04/health/cdc-us-zika-babies-2016/index.html	1 in 10 Zika infected moms have babies with birth defects - CNN.com	(CNN)One in 10 pregnant women with confirmed Zika infection had a fetus or baby with Zika-related complications in 2016, the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said Tuesday. The findings are based on the US Zika Pregnancy Registry, which was established last year to track Zika among pregnant women in the United States and its territories (except Puerto Rico, which has a separate registry). The report included all 972 completed pregnancies from January through December 2016. Birth defects were reported in 5% (or 51) of the pregnancies with laboratory evidence of possible Zika infection, including six pregnancy losses that may have been due to miscarriage, stillbirth or termination. That number climbs to 10% when looking at women with confirmed Zika infections. Birth defects were reported in 15% of women who became infected with the virus during the first three months of pregnancy, known as the first trimester. This is in line with reports indicating that the infection during the earlier part of pregnancy poses a greater risk to the fetus. Devastating effects Reported birth defects include microcephaly, in which the brain does not develop properly, and other brain abnormalities. "We are still learning about the range of birth defects. ... (We've) seen it can cause vision, hearing, brain problems and others," said Dr. Anne Schuchat, the CDC's acting director. She added that babies can have seizures, restricted joint movement, feeding difficulties, trouble sitting up and inconsolable crying. What's worse, the effects of the virus aren't always obvious at birth and may develop later, which is why screening is critical for all babies born to women who may have been infected while pregnant. That screening includes brain imaging with an ultrasound or a CT scan, as recommended by the CDC. Yet the new report found that only 24% of children of women who might have been infected during pregnancy were given brain scans after they were born. "Because we don't have brain imaging results for most babies (captured by the registry), our numbers may be low," said Peggy Honein, chief of the CDC's birth defects branch. "Identifying these babies as soon as possible after birth is important to ensure they receive the best care possible." That care is estimated to cost up to $10 million in infants who survive into adulthood. Last month, the CDC reported that the proportion of Zika-related birth defects last year was nearly 20 times higher than what was seen during the pre-Zika years. Although the Zika pregnancy registry includes all 50 states, pregnancies in this new report were reported in only 44 states. All 51 birth defects reported Tuesday were cases in which the mothers were infected while traveling to 16 areas where the virus is circulating: Belize, Barbados, Brazil, Cape Verde, Colombia, the Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Guatemala, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Jamaica, Mexico, Puerto Rico, the Marshall Islands and Venezuela. Schuchat noted that where a person becomes infected has no impact on Zika-related pregnancy complications. The CDC reminds women who are pregnant or trying to become pregnant to avoid travel to areas where the virus is circulating and to follow recommendations for preventing sexual transmission of the virus if their partner has traveled to such an area. Every mosquito bite carries a risk, Schuchat said, and therefore preventing mosquito bites is critical to keep pregnant women and their babies safe. "Don't let this outbreak become your family's heartbreak," she said. Ongoing outbreak More than 5,100 cases of the virus have been reported in the continental US and Hawaii. Only a couple hundred cases of local transmission have been reported, as most people are infected while traveling to areas where Zika is circulating. Schuchat noted that 30 to 40 pregnant women are reported to the Zika registry each week. As of March 14, the most recent data available, the registry counts 1,617 women in the United States and its territories other than Puerto Rico. The CDC counts 1,228 completed pregnancies without known birth defects, 54 babies with Zika-related birth defects and seven pregnancy-related losses since the registry began last year. There are 389 women currently pregnant on the registry.  
1491409955	http://www.cnn.com/2017/02/16/health/malaria-zika-mosquito-bite-prevention/index.html	How soap, chairs and clothing could stop mosquito bites -- and disease - CNN.com	CNN Films' "Unseen Enemy," premieres Friday, April 7 at 9 p.m. ET/PT on CNN. (CNN)Known to health experts as the most deadly animal on the planet, the minuscule mosquito, with its dreaded whine, is responsible for millions of deaths from multiple diseases each year. In 2015, more than 210 million people had malaria, with an estimated 429,000 dying from the disease. That same year, more than 1.4 million people were thought to have chikungunya -- a debilitating disease causing fever and joint pain -- and each year, 390 million people are estimated to become infected with dengue, according to the World Health Organization. Yellow fever continues to cause outbreaks in Africa and South America, and 2015 saw an explosion of the Zika virus in 70 countries that had never experienced it before. These diverse, deadly diseases are all united by the way they are transmitted: the mosquito bite. "We need to kill mosquitoes," businessman and philanthropist Bill Gates told CNN during an exclusive interview. "So people have come along and given us ideas to (do) that." These people have come to him through the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, with ideas for everyday products that could be tweaked to cut down on the number of people bitten and infected each year. "Science today should give us tools to solve a lot of the big killers," Gates said. To date, mosquito control methods such as insecticide-treated bed nets and indoor spraying of insecticides in homes have been the driving force behind falling infection rates, specifically in efforts to control malaria. These nets are credited with nearly 70% of malaria cases prevented since 2000. But despite this progress, the disease continues to kill, and experts believe creative ideas are needed to help those who remain unprotected -- especially when they're away from home. It's all around you "What's going to happen is that you have round-the-clock protection," said Fredros Okumu, director of science at the Ifakara Health Institute in Tanzania, where more than 4 million cases of malaria were reported in 2015. "Repellent can be fitted on your wall ... on a floor mat ... their chair ... sandals." Okumu's team is making this wide range of goods mosquito-free by fitting them with a bespoke fabric coated with mosquito repellent and targeting objects people can't live without, making their use inherent. The repellents are volatile in nature, meaning they easily evaporate and can be detected from greater distances than ones that typically sit on your skin. Prototypes of the fabric on a chair have shown protection for up to six months, according to Okumu. But the strategy gets more complex. Rather than simply divert the mosquitoes onto someone else's skin, Okumu wants to capture them using a mosquito landing box, which mimics human odor to lure the bugs. "We're able to capture them," he said. "And this way, we are providing protection to whoever is using this facility ... (and) communal protection to everyone else." So far, most attention has been given to the chair, on which Velcro is used to attach repellent fabric to the underside, providing protection while avoiding direct contact with a user's skin -- an important point given the strength of the insecticides. But Okumu believes that other furnishings and everyday items, such as footwear, can incorporate this material and enable people to be protected wherever they go -- and easily. "People might be very poor ... but one thing that is almost universal is that they always wear some form of footwear," he said, adding that this can ensure maximum compliance. "This is part of our evolution." When it comes to disease control, however, human behavior is a major barrier. "The issue is whether people will use it or buy it," said Flaminia Catteruccia, assistant professor of immunology and infectious disease at the Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health. "Something for long-term use has to also be thoroughly tested" for side effects. Would you use the chair or wear the sandals? Okumu believes you would. "The fight against malaria is so difficult, we'll need all tools," Catteruccia added. "It's important to explore methods ... at the community or village level, these may be effective." Among those exploring multiple approaches to mosquito control are students in the graduate program and researchers at the Johns Hopkins Center for Bioengineering Innovation and Design. During a "Zika hackathon" competition last year, they were challenged to come up with creative ways to fight the Zika epidemic, with a focus on the mosquitoes spreading the virus. "For a large part of the planet, mosquito disease remains a huge problem," said Dr. Soumyadipta Acharya, director of the Johns Hopkins graduate program. "New thinking is needed from various angles." A key area given attention was catching people during their daily activities -- such as washing. It's in your soap In contrast to long-lasting, volatile insecticides that could harm your skin, an opposite group of compounds is shorter-lived and residual, meaning they can comfortably reside on your skin. Acharya's team is trying one of these, permethrin, in soap. "There are different insecticides for different uses," he said. "(This one) stays behind on the skin, as all soaps do as well." The teams at Johns Hopkins are not the first to develop anti-mosquito soaps. Last year, another repellent-based product -- known as Faso soap -- began development in Burkina Faso after the researchers behind it won the Global Social Venture Competition at the University of California, Berkeley and received funding to develop it further. But both versions are still in early development and face multiple challenges before being allowed onto the market. "There are many tests needed to evaluate the safety and efficacy," Acharya said, adding that teams also need to figure out how long a soap's effects last: It should be at least 24 hours, before a person would wash again. Catteruccia added that soap will provide very personal protection and not have "benefits at the community level," she said. "Mosquitoes are also highly resilient, so they will always be able to get round this." Insecticide resistance has been a challenge for health teams around the world. According to the World Health Organization, 60 of 96 countries where malaria is endemic have reported resistance since 2010. But Acharya is hopeful that a soap, if proven effective, could be used along with other approaches to help protect people wherever they go. His teams are also working on banners to be hung near homes that emit repellents, as well as traps with real-time sensors to monitor mosquito numbers in a community and alert residents to protect themselves when spikes occur. The traps were piloted in Brazil earlier this year. "It's going to be a multipronged approach," Acharya said, highlighting that soaps, sprays, banners, traps and more can work together to keep mosquitoes at arm's length. "Together, your odds of getting bitten are reduced." It's in your clothes and accessories "Wearable technology can protect against mosquito bites during the day," said James Logan, senior lecturer in medical entomology at the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine. Logan is also working on technologies to protect people through the clothes they wear and the accessories and furniture they own. His approach with clothing is two-pronged: impregnating the clothes themselves and also the detergents they're washed with. By also incorporating insecticides into plastics, he hopes to extend protection to hats, handbags and household items. "It's about what people will accept," said Logan, whose teams regularly speak to people in affected communities to learn which products they're most likely to use. One prototype recently trialed in Thailand was a school uniform laced with the insecticide permethrin to prevent infections from dengue. More than 1,800 students were enrolled from 10 schools, with five schools using the new product and the other five monitored as a control group. The number of mosquitoes caught inside classrooms of students wearing the treated uniforms was significantly reduced in the month after their introduction. The challenge, however, was making the effect last. The uniforms' ability to knock down mosquitoes fell dramatically after four washes. "That study was encouraging," said Logan, who is preparing prototypes of a wider range of products: general clothing, footwear, jewelry and detergents. "It's important you target your demographic," he added. "And we need to understand the diversity of everyday lives." His team are now also developing more natural repellants, based on human odor, to incorporate into their product range. By creating diverse good for people to choose from, Logan hopes these protective products will be "relevant anywhere in the world," to overcome the barrier of human compliance. "It's always going to be a combination of different interventions taken to communities," he said. "Wearable technologies won't eliminate malaria on their own, but they will help."  
1491410554	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/05/politics/steve-bannon-white-house-national-security-council/index.html	In reversal, Bannon removed from National Security Council role - CNNPolitics.com	(CNN)Steve Bannon, President Donald Trump's chief strategist, has been removed from his permanent seat at the National Security Council, multiple sources tell CNN, moving the council into a more traditional format. The decision, which one source with knowledge said was made by Trump himself, comes after the President in January authorized the reorganization of the National Security Council to include Bannon as a permanent member of the panel. In a regulatory filing posted Wednesday, Bannon's title was removed from the standing list of members of the National Security Council. Bannon's removal was first reported by Bloomberg. Multiple sources looked to minimize the removal. One argued that Bannon was put on the council to ensure that it no longer "micro-managed" foreign policy and was put on a more "operational track." Another said Bannon was only on board to oversee former national security adviser Mike Flynn's work to "de-operationalize" the National Security Council from the broad purview it had under Susan Rice, President Barack Obama's national security adviser. Flynn, after his undisclosed contacts with Russian operatives were revealed through media reports, resigned from the council in February. H.R. McMa ster, a United States Army lieutenant general, was named national security adviser later in February. A source with knowledge of the move said Bannon can "still attend any meeting" where his expertise is needed. "In all the time he was there, he only attended one principals' meeting," the source said. "He is still welcome to attend principal meetings." The decision to elevate Bannon in the first place was a controversial one because, at the same time, the order indicated that the director of national intelligence and the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff would not be regular attendees. The committee is a Cabinet-level group of agencies focused on national security that was established by President George H. W. Bush in 1989. Regular members of the Principals Committee will include the secretary of state, the treasury secretary, the defense secretary, the attorney general, the secretary of Homeland Security, the assistant to the President and chief of staff, the assistant to the President and chief strategist, the national security adviser and the Homeland Security adviser. Former acting CIA chief Michael Morell sharply criticized the move in January, calling it "unprecedented" in an appearance on "CBS This Morning." "I have never been to a principals' meeting where the views of the DNI and the views of the chairman are not relevant," said Morell, who advised Hillary Clinton's campaign for president. "Every principals' meeting starts with an intelligence briefing by the DNI." Bannon's accession also demonstrated the breadth of his influence inside the White House, signaling that the former head of Brietbart News' influence extended beyond politics and domestic policy. CNN's Nicole Gaouette contributed to this report. 
1491410451	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/04/politics/who-is-susan-rice/index.html	Why Susan Rice is the perfect villain for Republicans - CNNPolitics.com	Washington (CNN)Since her time as a national security adviser and former UN ambassador during the Obama administration, Susan Rice had largely been out of the limelight until she was recently thrust into the snowballing White House surveillance controversy. Rice reportedly attempted on numerous occasions to uncover the identities of President Donald Trump's associates caught on tape incidentally during intelligence surveillance. The report quickly re-opened an unsubstantiated debate on whether the Obama administration previously ordered wiretaps on Trump's phones. Rice defended her actions Tuesday, telling MSNBC that her requests were "absolutely not for any political purposes, to spy, or anything." "There were occasions when I would receive a report in which a US person was referred to -- name not provided, just a US person -- and sometimes in that context, in order to understand the importance of the report, and assess its significance, it was necessary to find out, or request the information as to who the US official was," Rice said. "The notion that some people are trying to suggest, is that by asking for the identity of a person is leaking it, is unequivocally false," Rice added. "There is no connection between unmasking and leaking." It's not the first time Rice has found herself at the center of a political controversy. A steadfast fixture through both of Obama's presidential terms, she served as the US ambassador to the United Nations and later national security adviser from 2013 to 2017. Benghazi At one point Rice had a clear trajectory to succeed Hillary Clinton as secretary of state in 2013, but withdrew her name from consideration following a public outcry over her role in the handling of the Benghazi attacks. In the days following the September 11, 2012, attacks on the Benghazi consulate that killed Ambassador Chris Stevens and three other Americans, Rice became the Obama administration's point person on the matter. In multiple TV appearances soon after that attack, Rice cited an anti-Islam video that fueled a "spontaneous" mob as the reason for the deaths. Senior US officials later said that Rice's comments were based on an intelligence assessment that was eventually updated to reflect a preliminary view that demonstrators were not the culprits. But some Republicans suggested Rice's initial characterization was fueled by politics during a presidential campaign, and criticism intensified as the explanation of events slowly shifted. The administration eventually raised the possibility that the attack was planned by al Qaeda. Months after the attack, Rice's comments in the wake of the attack were used as grist by Senate Republicans who said they could not support her as Clinton's successor. Obama eventually appointed Sen. John Kerry of Massachusetts to the role. Bowe Bergdahl Following her appointment as national security adviser, Rice created some waves in a 2014 interview where she appeared to offer pity for accused Army deserter Bowe Bergdahl, who had just been released to the US. Bergdahl was accused of deserting his unit in 2009. After nearly five years in Taliban captivity, the US exchanged five Taliban prisoners for his release. Rice told CNN in an interview at the time that Bergdahl served the United States with "honor and distinction." "I realize there has been lots of discussion and controversy around this," Rice said. "But what I was referring to was the fact that this was a young man who volunteered to serve his country in uniform at a time of war. That, in and of itself, is a very honorable thing." As details of Bergdahl's disappearance became public following his release, the Obama administration came under increasing fire for its decision to trade the Taliban prisoners. Rice's comments attracted criticism from members of the military and Republicans who viewed Bergdahl as a deserter and objected to the trade. Friend of Albright Rice's path began decades ago with the help of family friend Madeleine Albright, the woman who became the first female secretary of state. While serving under President Bill Clinton, Albright recommended that he tap Rice for a high-level State Department post on African affairs in the late 1990s. Albright had previously served with Rice's mother, Lois Rice, on a school board in Washington and watched Rice grow up with her own daughters. "If I were to characterize her, whether it's playing basketball or anything else, she's fearless," Albright said about Rice in a Washington Post interview during her time as the top US diplomat. Rice, 52, was born in Washington to parents with distinguished careers. Her mother, who passed away this January, was an expert on financing of higher education and served on the board of directors of 11 major US corporations. She was characterized as the trailblazing executive behind Pell Grants. Her father, Emmett Rice, died in 2011. He was a professor of economics at Cornell University, was a member of the Federal Reserve Board of Governors and flew with the Tuskegee Airmen in World War II. 'The Bulldozer' Rice, who was valedictorian of her class and a star point guard on the basketball team at the National Cathedral School, exhibited "superior leadership skills" and "left behind a remarkable legacy," wrote former teacher John Wood who noted Rice's accomplishments in a Washington Post letter to the editor. She earned Phi Beta Kappa honors at Stanford University, where she earned her bachelors degree in history and won a Rhodes Scholarship to study international relations at Oxford University in 1986. After graduation from Oxford, Rice headed to McKinsey & Company in Toronto, where she worked as an international management consultant. In 1992, she married Ian Cameron, a producer for the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation, whom she had met at Stanford. In 1993, Rice returned to Washington to take a position with the National Security Council as director of international organizations and peacekeeping. She was promoted in 1995 to become special assistant to Clinton and senior director of African affairs at the White House National Security Council. In 2008, she was national security and foreign relations adviser for Obama's first presidential campaign. In nominating her to the ambassador's post, Obama called Rice "a close and trusted adviser" and said she "shares my belief that the UN is an indispensable -- and imperfect -- forum." At the same time, she has drawn some attention for the way she operates. Insiders say Rice is ambitious and aggressive. Colum Lynch of the Washington Post and Foreign Policy told CNN that one of her nicknames at the UN Security Council was "The Bulldozer." "I think that everyone has complicated feelings about her," Lynch said. He characterized her as "very personable, likeable, charming, smart, funny, down to earth" but also someone with sharp elbows. Rice is currently a Distinguished Visiting Research Fellow at American University, where she is both mentoring students on careers in national security and working on her next book. CNN's Allison Brennan and Jim Acosta contributed to this report. 
1491410369	http://www.cnn.com/2016/11/08/health/patient-zero-history-super-spreaders/index.html	The untold stories of 'patients zero' - CNN.com	Watch CNN Films' "Unseen Enemy," premiering Friday, April 7 at 9 p.m. ET/PT on CNN. (CNN)When a researcher's scrawling of the letter O was misinterpreted as a zero in reference to a HIV patient in the early 1980s, the provocative term "patient zero" was born. It triggered a wave of events in which the patient, Gaëtan Dugas, a French-Canadian flight attendant, was erroneously blamed for bringing the human immunodeficiency virus, or HIV, to the United States. Decades passed before research, published in the journal Nature last month, cleared Dugas' name and provided strong evidence that the virus emerged in the United States from a pre-existing Caribbean epidemic in or around 1970. Though Dugas' disturbing saga has been put to rest, the term "patient zero" lives on, and continues to create confusion and curiosity about how disease spreads. "Zero is a capacious word," Richard McKay, a historian at the University of Cambridge in England and a co-author of the Nature study, said last month. "It could mean nothing, but it can also mean the absolute beginning." Super-spreaders vs. super-shedders "Patient zero" is still frequently used to describe index cases -- the first documented cases of a disease observed or reported to health officials. Many scientists and public health officials are loath to identify those patients and avoid the term "patient zero" altogether, said Thomas Friedrich, an associate professor of pathobiological sciences at the University of Wisconsin-Madison School of Veterinary Medicine. "Identifying one person as the patient zero, on the one hand may give an incorrect impression about how the disease emerges in the first place and, on the other hand, insinuate that somebody should be blamed for this outbreak, when that's not really appropriate," Friedrich said. "Nonetheless, it's important scientifically and for people and public health to understand index cases so that we know how diseases are coming into a community and how to stop their spread." Some scientists argue that it's equally important to analyze primary cases -- the person or animal that first brings a bacterium or virus into a population. For many infectious-disease pandemics, the primary case will never be known, said Dr. Ian Lipkin, a professor of epidemiology and director of the Center for Infection and Immunity at Columbia University in New York. "It is not uncommon for infectious agents to percolate in the environment for years or even decades without detection," Lipkin said, adding that an agent could enter the human population in more than just one person. And even after an infectious agent crosses into the human population, some people are more capable of spreading it than others, he noted. "So it may make more sense to talk in terms of super-spreaders than patient zeroes," Lipkin said. "Super-spreaders may travel or engage in certain types of behaviors ... that result in transmission to large numbers of people." For instance, even though Dugas wasn't the patient zero of HIV, he still may have served as a super-spreader, Lipkin said. Still others might be super-shedders, individuals who shed many more types of the virus into the environment -- and not just through person-to-person contact -- than others. Whether they were truly patient zero, super-spreaders or super-shedders, here are the stories of six people who may have played a role in the spread of deadly diseases in the 20th and 21st centuries. The real Typhoid Mary One of the first-known examples of super-spreading, and maybe even super-shedding, was Mary Mallon. She became known as Typhoid Mary, said Dr. Richard Stein, a research scientist at New York University School of Medicine and adjunct assistant professor at City University of New York, who wrote the book "Super-Spreading in Infectious Diseases." "I'm still not sure whether she was only a super-spreader or whether she was also a super-shedder or possibly both," Stein said. Mallon, an Irish-born cook, appeared healthy as she prepared meals for the families she worked for in the early 1900s in New York. Soon after her meals were served, members of the households where she worked developed typhoid fever, a life-threatening illness caused by the bacterium Salmonella typhi. As more households where she worked developed typhoid fever, Mallon was soon identified as something of a patient zero, even though she never developed the symptoms. "There are these individuals, like so-called Typhoid Mary, who for one reason or another may be infected with a pathogen and not have that many symptoms but can shed that pathogen in a way that makes it infectious to other people," Friedrich said. Mallon was forced into quarantine on two occasions for a total of 26 years, during which she unsuccessfully sued the New York department of health, saying she didn't feel sick and therefore could not infect other people. She died in 1938. No one really knows whether Mallon was the true patient zero in the typhoid case or simply a super-spreader or super-shedder. After all, naming a patient zero remains tricky. "I can't even think of a time when we've actually known an index case," said Dr. Bertram Jacobs, director and professor of virology at Arizona State University's School of Life Sciences. The closest we can come is probably the SARS epidemic, he said. The spread of SARS Scientists have traced a serious super-spreading event during the 2003 global outbreak of SARS to one doctor and one night that he spent in a Hong Kong hotel, according to a World Health Organization bulletin (PDF). Dr. Liu Jianlun, a 64-year-old medical doctor from southern China's Guangdong province, was ill during his stay at the hotel and may have transferred the virus to at least 16 other guests staying on the same floor, according to the bulletin. Coincidentally, Liu stayed in room 911 on the ninth floor of the Metropole Hotel. "You wouldn't call him 'patient zero,' but if you consider his impact in terms of the outbreak, he was critical in the spread of the disease," said Lipkin, who received the International Science and Technology Cooperation Award this year for assisting the WHO and the People's Republic of China during the height of the SARS outbreak.  The other hotel guests who were exposed to the virus probably traveled to other countries after being infected. In less than four months, about 4,000 cases and 550 deaths from SARS could be traced to Liu's stay in Hong Kong. How was Liu infected with SARS to begin with? The hospital where he worked treated SARS, and Liu might have come into contact with the virus through a patient. In Guangdong, it was believed that a farmer first developed SARS after coming in contact with the virus through an animal. Such diseases that are spread from animals are called zoonotic. "For many zoonotic infectious diseases, the first step involves the species jump, and then if the virus is able to be transmitted directly among humans and no longer needs the animal reservoir for this, it has the potential to unleash an epidemic," Stein said. "I think that, exploring this from a global perspective, that very first patient would be patient zero." 'Contagion' in real life SARS is believed to have originated in bat species and then spread to other animals, such as civet cats, before infecting humans in China, according to the WHO. "In the process of adapting from one species to the next, you have the spread of disease," Lipkin said, who served as senior technical adviser during the production of the 2011 medical thriller "Contagion." Some of the scenes in the film mirror his memories of Beijing when he assisted in managing the SARS outbreak, Lipkin said. In the film, a fictional deadly virus sweeps the world after migrating from a dead pig to a chef that handles it. About 60% of all existing human infectious diseases are zoonotic, said Stein, the research scientist at New York University. In other words, there are numerous microorganisms in nature that infect animals -- and some of these same microorganisms infect humans. "It was predicted that by 2020, about 10 to 40 new viruses might emerge in humans," Stein said, citing a 2008 study published in the journal Proceedings of the Royal Society B.  "There are plenty of potential patient zeroes out there that get infected with stuff," said University of Wisconsin-Madison's Friedrich. "What's preventing a new pandemic is not so much that animal viruses just can not infect humans. In fact, the more we look, the more we see that people do get infected with animal viruses all the time," he said. The key to an outbreak, Friedrich said, is for those viruses to be transmitted from a single person to more people. That's exactly what H5N1 avian flu, or bird flu, did. A new virus emerges In 2004, a 6-year-old boy named Captain Boonmanuch became the first confirmed casualty of bird flu in Thailand as the virus spread across Asia, USA Today reported. Captain might not have been patient zero, but his family recalled that before falling ill, the youngster scooped up a squawking chicken and carried it to his uncle's home. It is believed that the chicken shed the avian flu virus during this encounter, possibly infecting Captain and others. Between 2003 and 2016, a total of 856 cases of human infections with H5N1 viruses worldwide have been documented, and there have been 452 deaths, according to the WHO (PDF). "New epidemics that emerge in humans often come from contact with animal diseases," Jacobs said. "The viruses that really circulate in humans turn out mostly to be reassortants between viruses, usually from birds and other human viruses." A reassortant is the virus that emerges when the genetic material from two or more other viruses infecting a single human or animal host mix together. That mixing is often referred to as a reassortment event, which occurs frequently in nature. "Avian influenza viruses don't replicate well in humans, human influenza viruses don't replicate well in birds, but if a bird virus and a human virus gets into a pig, you can have reassortment and get totally new strains out," Jacobs said. That's what happened in 2009 with another type of flu -- H1N1 swine flu -- that took the world by storm. A boy who survived swine flu H1N1 influenza emerged in humans to cause a pandemic in 1918, Friedrich said, and then a similar pandemic hit the world in 2009. It is believed that, leading up to the 2009 pandemic, pigs became infected with a few different viruses. A reassortment resulted in an H1N1 strain that had some eerie genetic resemblances to the 1918 virus, Friedrich said. The resulting outbreak serves as an example of how new flu viruses might enter the human population, Friedrich said. "For the most recent H1N1, it definitely seems like it came from pigs, (even though) they're ultimately bird viruses," Friedrich said. "The term that people use in the flu world is that pigs are 'mixing vessels,' in which bird viruses and mammal viruses can mix together and create new combinations that are more likely to infect people than just straight-up bird viruses," Friedrich explained. Edgar Hernandez was a 5-year-old living in the Mexican town of La Gloria when doctors identified him as the earliest documented case of swine flu in the 2009 outbreak. Edgar survived the illness, which his mother believed developed due to a pig in the neighborhood. "With these index cases, it's not just getting infected with an animal virus, but rather, that virus probably has to do things to become transmissible in people, and it has to get out of that first person and get into other people to really become an outbreak," Friedrich said. "Some viruses can do that, and some can't. Some can do it but only weakly, and they die out, and some do it really well, and then those become the outbreaks that we hear about." Emile and Ebola One virus long known to aggressively pass from human to human, like a piton in a dangerous race, is Ebola. Ebola can be introduced into the human population through close contact with the blood, secretions, organs and other bodily fluids of infected animals, such as fruit bats, monkeys or even forest antelope, according to the WHO. A 2-year-old boy was the suspected first case of the recent Ebola outbreak, suggesting that there was a "single introduction of the virus into the human population," according to a study published in the New England Journal of Medicine in 2014. Emile Ouamouno was a toddler living in the southern Guinea village of Meliandou when he suddenly developed fever, vomiting and severe diarrhea in December 2013. Officials said he might have contracted the disease from a bat. He died four days after his symptoms emerged. Within a month, his grandmother, mother and 3-year-old sister died from the disease as well. As in previous Ebola outbreaks, the virus continued to spread through contact with the body and with human bodily fluids, possibly even after the human died, said Stein, the research scientist at New York University. "Ebola is interesting, because for this infectious disease, studies found that unsafe burial practices, which involve washing and preparing the body of the deceased, apparently contributed to the infection of many people who were participating in this cultural practice," Stein said, noting that people could have dispersed a high number of viruses before dying, as well. 'In the wrong place at the wrong time' MERS, Middle East respiratory syndrome, is a fierce virus identified in Saudi Arabia in 2012 and named in 2013. Though scientists are still studying the origins of the virus, they know that camels were likely to be an animal source of MERS infection in humans, according to the WHO, which has been notified of at least 1,813 cases of MERS infections since 2012. Last year, there was a MERS outbreak in South Korea, and a 68-year-old man with an extensive travel history was reported to be the so-called patient zero. The man traveled to Bahrain, the United Arab Emirates, Saudi Arabia and Qatar before returning to South Korea. He was not ill with symptoms during his travels, according to the WHO, but once he fell ill, he went to the Samsung Medical Center in Seoul. According to the the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, the time between being exposed to MERS and experiencing symptoms can range from two to 14 days. The man may have transmitted MERS to 28 other people before arriving at the hospital, according to a study published in The Lancet in July. A patient among them who subsequently sought care may have transmitted MERS to an additional 82 people in the hospital. However, it's still important to keep in mind that "it's very difficult for us to identify who is a cardinal case in an outbreak," said Lipkin, the epidemiologist at Columbia University. "There are rare examples of when we do see that happen, like in the Ebola outbreak, because we followed it in real time, but when you try to reconstruct after the fact, it's easy to be misled." And being misled isn't good for science or humanity, said Jacobs, the virologist at Arizona State University. "As humans, we sort of want to make tight stories about things, and sometimes that involves blaming or saying, 'Oh, this person started the epidemic,' " Jacobs said. "With history, at least the history of infectious diseases, it's not that tight. It's not that clean. It's very rare that we can say, 'This person did it; this person started it.' Even if they did, most of the time, they weren't doing anything consciously to start an epidemic. They happened to be in the wrong place at the wrong time."  
1491410306	http://www.cnn.com/2017/02/16/health/flu-shot-effective-cdc-study/index.html	Flu vaccine is 48% effective this season, CDC says - CNN.com	CNN Films' "Unseen Enemy," premieres Friday, April 7 at 9 p.m. ET/PT on CNN. (CNN)The flu shot has been reducing the risk of infections in the United States by about half this season, according to reports issued Thursday by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, but the season is expected to continue for several more weeks. The predominant virus strain this season is influenza A (H3N2) strain; the estimated effectiveness of the vaccine in preventing illness caused by that strain was 43%. The vaccine's estimated effectiveness against the influenza B virus was 73%. That amounts to overall protection of 48%, the CDC said. The CDC's interim findings are based on data from November 28 through February 4 for 3,144 children and adults who are enrolled in the United States Influenza Vaccine Effectiveness Network. The CDC uses information from this network to routinely estimate effectiveness of the flu vaccine as the season progresses. During the 2015-16 season, vaccine effectiveness was 47% -- about the same as this season. During the 2014-15 season, effectiveness was just 19%, according to the CDC. "The viruses in the vaccine are a good match for the circulating viruses this season," said Brendan Flannery, lead investigator for the US Flu Vaccine Effectiveness Network. "The prediction for the H3N2 virus was right on in terms of that particular virus continuing to be a dominant virus." As Flannery explained, the H3N2 was not seen much during last season, but it's the same virus that first appeared in the 2014-15 season. "This vaccine is a much better match for the circulating virus than the vaccine we had two years ago." In a separate report, the CDC noted that flu activity in the US began to increase in mid-December, remained elevated through early February and is expected to continue for several more weeks. Influenza A (H3N2) viruses have predominated, though the CDC also identified influenza A (H1N1)pdm09 and influenza B viruses. From October 2 through February 4, 38,244 specimens tested positive for flu virus in the US, according to the new report. Age was reported for 13,306 patients: 7.9% were younger than 4 years old, 30.4% were between 5 and 24 years old, 30.3% were between 25 and 64 years old, and 31.5% were 65 or older. Fifty-one of 54 US states and territories are experiencing elevated levels of flu and flu-like illnesses. There have been 20 pediatric deaths reported this season. The CDC recommends that unvaccinated people who are 6 months old or older still get a shot this year. "Influenza activity may have peaked where there were early peaks in the Northwest and on the West Coast," Flannery said. "Activity is increasing in some of the Midwest and the East Coast." However, it's "unpredictable where it's going to peak," he said, and after what appears to have been a peak, "there can still be an increase in activity in some areas." For example, it seemed like a peak occurred in early January, but afterward, activity rose in several areas. "We were a bit surprised by how much the influenza activity has increased recently," Flannery said, "and I think that strengthens the message for people to still get vaccinated." Building a vaccine The flu shot is an inactivated influenza vaccine. Each February, the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices, a group of medical and public health experts, makes the final decision about which virus strains will go into vaccines, which will be sold beginning in September to protect people during the forthcoming flu season. The committee's decision is based on information from more than 100 countries, where influenza-monitoring centers conduct surveillance of circulating viruses. The committee members consider which viruses are making people sick, where those viruses are spreading and how well the previous season's vaccine protects against them. After the committee selects the strains to be used for the vaccine, manufacturers will produce trivalent formulations with three strains and quadrivalent formulations with four strains for the upcoming season; both trivalent and quadrivalent shots are equally recommended, according to Flannery. Generally, vaccine effectiveness varies and not only based on what type of viruses are circulating. "How well the vaccine matches the circulating virus is certainly a big factor," Flannery said. "But that's not the whole story, and sometimes there are differences by age or ... the immune status of the individual. So there are individual factors as well as the circulating viruses that influence vaccine effectiveness." The pattern this season is very similar to previous H3N2 seasons, according to Flannery, with higher hospitalization rates seen in the 65 and older population. "Young kids also are having severe illness," he said. "Right now, it looks on track to be a moderately severe H3N2 season," he said. "It seems like it's similar to the 2012-2013 season, which was a season with millions of cases and about 60,000 hospitalizations and 2,000 deaths." 'If you haven't gotten vaccinated ... run' Infectious disease specialist Dr. William Schaffner freely admits that "the flu vaccine is an imperfect vaccine. It often cannot prevent flu completely." "But if you get vaccinated and get the flu, your disease is going to be in all likelihood much milder than it might have been. You won't have to be admitted to the hospital, you won't have to go to the ICU, and you won't die." "So half a loaf is better than none," Schaffner said. "In the meantime, we support the people who are working in laboratories to make an even better influenza vaccine, which we hope will be available a few years down the road. "Still, we can do a lot of good with a pretty good vaccine available today." With flu continuing to occur through this month and into March, there's still flu that can be prevented or made less severe, Schaffner said. "So that's why we always say it's not too late -- but it is very late. "If you haven't gotten vaccinated and you haven't gotten sick yet, run -- do not walk -- this afternoon. You should get your flu vaccine, because it does take 10 days to two weeks for maximum protection." If you do come down with the flu, it is important to call a health care provider who can give you a prescription for an antiviral drug. "And what that will do is also make the disease less severe, and you're likely not to be ill for as long," Schaffner said. "It shortens the duration of the influenza, and it also makes it less likely you will spread that virus to the people around you." Specifically, the CDC advises early treatment with oseltamivir for anyone at risk for suffering flu complications, a group that includes "65 and older, young children, people with underlying compromising health conditions" and those who are hospitalized, according to Flannery. "If influenza is suspected, it doesn't have to be confirmed," Flannery said. "It should be started as early as possible and shouldn't depend on whether someone was vaccinated or not."  
1491411039	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/05/politics/adam-schiff-white-house-documents/index.html	Adam Schiff: White House resisting showing intel at center of Trump allegations - CNNPolitics.com	(CNN)The top Democrat on the House's Russia investigation said Wednesday the White House is fighting against releasing the intelligence at the center of President Donald Trump's accusations that he was a victim of surveillance. "The White House clearly only wanted one person to see these documents, and that person was our chairman," Schiff said on CNN's "New Day," referring to House Intelligence Chairman Devin Nunes' coordination with White House staff to review documents showing top Trump aides were picked up in "incidental" collection by US intelligence. "I want the full committees to be able to see that, and we're meeting resistance," Schiff said. "If these documents are so damning or so indicating of the President, as he suggests, why are they opposing efforts to provide them to the full committee? I think that's a question worthy of the White House answering." The White House did not immediately return CNN request for comment Wednesday morning. A representative for Schiff declined to explain what Schiff meant by his statement. Schiff's accusation marks a turn from just one day ago, when he said that the White House promised to show its intelligence to the other members of the House intelligence committee. Some lawmakers even said they might travel to the White House as early as Tuesday afternoon to review the intelligence, but as of Wednesday morning, Schiff and Nunes were the only lawmakers to have seen the intelligence reports. The intelligence reports at the White House are at the center of two weeks of chaos that led top Democrats to call on Nunes to recuse himself from the House Russia investigation and, later, formed the core of Trump's argument that former national security adviser Susan Rice was responsible for surveillance against him. Since Rice's name first surfaced in conservative media outlets Monday, interest has grown in what the intelligence reports actually show. RELATED: House Russia investigators briefed on Nunes findings, White House trip possible House Democratic Leader Nancy Pelosi said Wednesday she plans to review the intelligence and doesn't "expect to" run into any resistance from the White House. "I expect that I will see that," Pelosi said Wednesday. She then accused Trump of making House Republicans look like "fools." "The White House has made fools of their allies in the House of Representatives in the way they've handled this," Pelosi said. "They cook up some intelligence. They bring the chairman of the committee -- a very distinguished position which he has tarnished -- they use him as a tool to tell him what they have cooked up, now you go tell the President what we have cooked up and try to represent to the American people that this is legitimate intelligence." CNN's Manu Raju contributed to this report. 
1491410857	http://money.cnn.com/2017/04/05/news/us-womens-soccer-equal-pay/index.html	U.S. women's soccer team gets a raise in new labor deal - Apr. 5, 2017	Carli Lloyd: 'We put just as much effort in as men do' The U.S. Women's National Soccer Team is getting a raise, bigger bonuses and the same per diems as the men. The women's team announced Wednesday that it had struck a new labor deal with U.S. Soccer, the sport's governing body. For months, the women have said that their pay and treatment is unequal to the men's team. The women will also get better hotel and travel accommodations and will be reimbursed for the years when their per diems were less than those of the men. An outline of the agreement was confirmed to CNNMoney by a source familiar with the deal. Further details were not immediately released. The deal runs through 2021, meaning it will cover their participation in the 2019 FIFA Women's World Cup and the 2020 Olympics. In a joint statement, the two sides said the deal will help grow the game around the world and improve the lives of players. "We are proud of the hard work and commitment to thoughtful dialogue reflected through this process, and look forward to strengthening our partnership moving forward," the statement said. Related: US women's hockey team scores better pay, same benefits as men The stars on the women's team are already paid more by U.S. Soccer than some of the men. The labor deal will raise the pay for players at all levels. The women had argued that they were paid less despite playing more games and having a better record. They won the Women's World Cup in 2015. U.S. Soccer argued that the men's team brings in more money, including more lucrative TV deals, and draws bigger crowds. In March, five players on the women's team, Hope Solo, Alex Morgan, Megan Rapinoe, Carli Lloyd and Becky Sauerbrunn, brought a complaint against U.S. Soccer before the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission. That complaint has not been resolved. Related: Carli Lloyd and Alex Morgan head overseas amid US fight for 'Equal Play, Equal Pay' The labor deal comes a day after Equal Pay Day, which is meant to raise awareness about the gender pay gap. It also comes after the U.S. Women's National Hockey Team won a historic victory for women's sports. After more than a week of protest, the players reached a deal with USA Hockey that guarantees them better pay and the same benefits as the men's team. CNNMoney (New York) First published April 5, 2017: 10:11 AM ET
1491410827	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/05/politics/airport-electronics-ban-kelly/index.html	US may add airports to electronics ban - CNNPolitics.com	Washington (CNN)The US may expand the number of airports affected by a ban on large electronics in carry-on luggage, Homeland Security Secretary John Kelly said Wednesday, based on a "real" threat. Kelly told a Senate committee that the move by his agency to ban large devices like laptops in carry-on luggage from 10 airports in eight countries is based on a specific concern. "It's real. I think it's getting realer, so to speak," Kelly said. "We may take measures in the not-too-distant future to expand the number of airports." Kelly insisted the measures taken to date, which affect flights from predominantly Muslim countries, were not taken "because of the Muslim religion" or any other prejudicial reasons, but rather because of specific concerns. Kelly said that briefed President Donald Trump on the plan, but it was his decision, and that he made it because of the threat. "It's a real threat. We know on any given day, there are dozens of cells that are talking about aviation, and you just watch them over time and see if they develop and they go from talking to actually doing something. So there's a real threat all the time," he said. CNN reported on Tuesday that enhanced screening is also taking place at 14 airports in the US. The Department of Homeland Security is targeting and isolating certain aircraft for additional screening upon landing in the United States as part of the larger electronics ban the agency announced late last month. The additional security procedure is happening behind the scenes and was not publicly disclosed by DHS when it announced a ban on electronic devices in the cabin of certain flights. A source with knowledge of the screening procedures told CNN that TSA is targeting flights arriving from the same Middle Eastern and North African countries covered in the electronics ban, and screening them with bombs sniffing dogs and equipment. CNN also reported last month that terrorists are developing new bombs that could be hidden in laptops to evade airport security screening. CNN's René Marsh contributed to this report. 
1491411499	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/05/opinions/courts-expands-protect-for-lgbt-employees-cevallos/index.html	A rare court ruling extends protection to LGBT workers (Opinion) - CNN.com	Danny Cevallos is a CNN legal analyst and an attorney practicing in the areas of personal injury, wrongful conviction and criminal defense in New York, Pennsylvania, and the US Virgin Islands. The opinions expressed in this commentary are his. (CNN)In a case with far-reaching implications, a federal appeals court on Tuesday ruled that the Civil Rights Act protects LGBT employees from workplace discrimination. The full panel of 7th US Circuit Court of Appeals heard the case, holding that plaintiff Kimberly Hively's 2014 lawsuit against Ivy Tech Community College could proceed. Hively argued that the school violated Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 when it denied the adjunct instructor full-time employment based on her sexual orientation. The appellate court's opinion could have been summed up in a sentence: We are going against several decades of judicial authority holding that Title VII does not cover sexual orientation. Or even more simply, we think it's time to reinterpret Title VII. Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 makes it unlawful for employers to discriminate on the basis of a person's sex. That prohibition against sex discrimination has traditionally excluded discrimination on the basis of a person's sexual orientation. Twenty states ban such discrimination. The Supreme Court, however, has never squarely addressed the issue. Make no mistake about it, this case was all but hopeless from the beginning. Hively had zero chance of winning ... right up to the moment she actually won. That's why her original claim with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission and her subsequent lawsuit were filed pro se, because no lawyer wanted to take on a case that was sure to lose. Not surprisingly, the trial court threw dismissed her case at the outset, because what she claimed -- even if true -- was not a violation of the law. She then appealed to a three-judge panel of the 7th Circuit, and those judges backed the trial court's decision: She didn't have a case. Then, that same appellate court agreed to hear the case again en banc. This time, all the judges would hear it, not just a three-judge panel. While that would have given Hively a glimmer of hope, there was every reason to expect that the appeals court would agree with not only the lower court, but its own prior decisions, and, and the historically accepted law of Title VII. This time, eight of the 11 judges voted to do something very different. Something very rare. For decades, Title VII has been interpreted as only prohibiting discrimination against women because they are women or against men because they are men, that Congress had only the traditional notion of "sex" in mind when it outlawed "sex discrimination." Who said so? The same court deciding the Hively case. And pretty much every other court that has ever addressed the issue. The 7th Circuit acknowledged the binding precedent, yet it found a way through it. After all, it observed, the Supreme Court has danced pretty close to this issue without actually taking it on. It has held that gender stereotyping falls within Title VII. This means an employer can't deny partnership to a female employee because she's too "aggressive" and isn't feminine enough. The high court has also held that a sexual harassment claim is not defeated if the sex of the harasser is the same as the sex of the victim. And of course, more recently, the Constitution now protects the right of same-sex couples to marry. The 7th Circuit did not seek to rewrite Title VII to add sexual orientation to the protected categories of race, color, religion, sex or national origin. Instead it sought to define what it really means to discriminate on the basis of sex, and in particular, whether employer actions based on sexual orientation are actions taken on the basis of sex. Ultimately, the test is whether the protected characteristic played a role in the adverse employment action. In other words, imagine Hively is a man, but everything else stays the same, including the sex of her partner. Isn't she then being treated differently only because she is a woman? The court also pointed out that if gender stereotyping is unlawful, then Hively is the classic example of someone who does not conform to others' stereotypes about females, e.g., that females stay at home with the kids, that they cook and ... that they are heterosexual. To the court, there really is no difference between a gender nonconformity claim and discrimination based on sexual orientation; if one is prohibited, so is the other. What about discrimination based not on your sex, but the sex of whom you associate with? Is there even a difference? The 2016 film "Loving" introduced many to a famous Supreme Court case that held racial restrictions on marriage were unconstitutional. To the 7th Circuit, if the law prohibits discrimination on the basis of the race of someone with whom a plaintiff associates, it also prohibits discrimination on the basis of the sex with whom a plaintiff associates. Even though the courts have excluded sexual orientation from Title VII since its enactment in 1964, the world -- and the laws -- have grown up around it since then. The landscape of sexual orientation laws is such that Title VII's long-accepted exclusion of sexual orientation is now an exception, rather than the norm. It's an exception with a firm history and legal foundation, however. That's why the 7th Circuit's decision is so significant in the legal world. It takes a lot of chutzpah for a judge -- even an en banc panel -- to break with established precedent. It's likely that this decision and the new interpretation of Title VII will stand, at least in this broad swath of Midwest states that make up the 7th Circuit. The employer, Ivy Tech, said Tuesday night it does not plan to appeal to the Supreme Court -- though it denies it discriminated against the plaintiff. It also likely means that, for the foreseeable future, there will be a split among the federal courts as to the meaning of federal discrimination law. In the coming weeks, this opinion will be criticized as judicial activism -- deciding a case based upon social trends, personal feelings or even the political landscape instead of the actual law. That could be true; even the 7th Circuit acknowledges its decision defies precedent established by virtually every other court that has decided whether sexual orientation is covered by Title VII. Of course, when you take a step back, Hively hasn't won the case against Ivy Tech. All the 7th Circuit did was allow her claim to exist, and to move forward. Hively's could still be a losing discrimination case. That doesn't matter today, because it wasn't really what the courts were deciding. They were deciding whether it was even a case to begin with. Last week it wasn't. Now it is.  
1491411401	http://money.cnn.com/2017/04/05/news/companies/nba-north-carolina-bathroom-bill/index.html	NBA All-Star Game will consider return to North Carolina after 'bathroom bill' repeal - Apr. 5, 2017	North Carolina lawmakers reach deal to repeal 'bathroom bill' The NBA will consider awarding a future All-Star Game to North Carolina now that the state has partially repealed the anti-LGBT law known as the bathroom bill. The league pulled the 2017 All-Star Game from Charlotte after the law was enacted. New Orleans hosted it instead. At the time, the NBA said it hoped to take the game back to Charlotte in 2019 "provided there is an appropriate resolution to this matter." The NBA board of governors will meet Thursday and consider whether the partial repeal is good enough, a source familiar with the matter told CNNMoney. An announcement is not expected. Los Angeles will host the 2018 game. Related: NCAA ends North Carolina ban after repeal of 'bathroom bill' The North Carolina law required people to use the restroom that corresponds with the gender on their birth certificate, not their gender identity, in government buildings and in public schools and universities. It also prevented local governments from passing nondiscrimination policies based on gender identity. North Carolina lawmakers voted in March to repeal the law and eliminated the bathroom stipulation. The replacement also allows cities to enact their own nondiscrimination ordinances beginning in 2020. LGBT rights groups are concerned that the repeal doesn't go far enough to protect people. Since the so-called bathroom bill" was enacted, NBA Commissioner Adam Silver has been vocal about changing the law. Related: Yelp is making it easier to find gender-neutral restrooms The NBA's review of whether to return to North Carolina comes after the NCAA lifted its own boycott. The NCAA had pulled tournaments from the state but said Tuesday it would consider North Carolina for future championships. CNNMoney (New York) First published April 5, 2017: 12:56 PM ET
1491411372	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/05/middleeast/idlib-syria-attack/index.html	Syria chemical attack victims gassed as they slept - CNN.com	This story contains graphic imagery. (CNN)Russian claims that a regime airstrike on a "terrorist" ammunition depot caused the deaths of at least 70 people in northern Syria have been rejected, as victims described the aftermath of chemical bombs dropped from planes. International condemnation mounted on Wednesday over what appeared to be a targeted chemical attack on a rebel-held town in Idlib province, one of the deadliest since the Syrian war began six years ago. The White House and the UK blamed the regime of President Bashar al-Assad for the outrage, which caused the deaths of at least 10 children, some asleep in their beds when the attack struck at dawn. At the United Nations, western powers lambasted Russia for standing by the Assad regime. The World Health Organization said victims bore the signs of exposure to nerve agents, and Amnesty International said evidence pointed to an "air-launched chemical attack." International agencies were working to establish the provenance of the agents used in the strike. Russia claimed the deaths were caused by gas released when a regime airstrike hit a chemical weapons factory on the ground. But victims being treated in a hospital on the Turkish side of the border told a CNN team they saw chemical bombs being dropped from planes. Key developments Dozens of victims have been taken to Turkey for treatment. The attack coincided with a two-day meeting in Brussels on Syria's future. UK Foreign Secretary Boris Johnson calls attack a 'barbaric act.' Medical experts and US say attack likely result of a nerve agent, like sarin gas. UN Security Council holds emergency meeting. The Russian defense ministry claimed on its Facebook page that a Syrian airstrike hit "workshops, which produced chemical warfare munitions" in the eastern outskirts of Khan Sheikhoun. It said that "terrorists" had been transporting the chemical munitions from its largest arsenal to Iraq. But a chemical weapons expert, Col. Hamish de Bretton-Gordon, told BBC Radio 4 that all signs showed the chemical used was sarin gas and that Russia's versions of events was "completely unsustainable." "I think this is pretty fanciful and no doubt the Russians trying to protect their allies. Axiomatically, if you blow up sarin, you destroy it," he said. Hours after the attack, several people were injured when an airstrike hit near a hospital in the same town, where victims from the earlier attack were being treated, the Aleppo Media Center activist group reported. The Syrian Civil Defense rescue group, known as the White Helmets, said the hospital was knocked out of service. Victim: 'I don't know if my family is dead or alive' Around 25 victims of the attack were being treated Wednesday at the Reyhanli Hospital in southern Turkey near the Syrian border. Several said that they saw a plane drop chemical bombs. Mazin Yusif, a 13-year-old-boy, broke down in tears as he spoke of what happened. "At six thirty in the morning, the plane struck. I ran up on our roof and saw that the strike was in front of my grandfather's house," he told CNN at the hospital. He said he ran toward the house and found his grandfather slumped over. He ran outside to call for help. "I got dizzy and then fainted in front of my grandfather's garage. I next found myself here in this hospital, naked in a bed." The boy's grandmother, 55-year-old Aisha al-Tilawi, said she saw blue and yellow after the plane dropped the chemical-laden bomb. "We started choking, felt dizzy, then fainted. Mazin was trying to wake up his grandfather. Three of my family died," she said, lying in bed with an oxygen mask on her face. Another victim, 31-year-old Ahmed Abdel Rahim, stared vacantly from his hospital bed as he explained he was hit with a poisonous substance carried by three rockets. "I was in my house. I had difficulty breathing, but I feel better now. But I did throw up after getting to the hospital. I don't know if my family is dead or alive. I don't know anything," he said. Worldwide condemnation The World Health Organization said some victims showed symptoms consistent with exposure to a category of chemicals that includes nerve agents. That conclusion was supported by Amnesty International, which said victims were "very likely" to have been exposed to a compound such as sarin. The Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons said it was gathering evidence about the attack. CNN saw a mobile laboratory provided by Turkish authorities at the Syrian border. Speaking at a high-level meeting in Brussels on the future of Syria, the UK's Johnson pointed the finger firmly at the Syrian regime. "All the evidence I have seen suggests that it was the Assad regime who did it, in full knowledge they were using illegal weapons in a barbaric attack on their own people," Johnson said. Assad's military has repeatedly denied using chemical weapons and consistently blames "terrorist" groups when chemical attacks are reported. But many of these are delivered through airstrikes, and no rebel or terrorist group in Syria is believed to have the capacity to carry out aerial bombardments. A UN investigation in August last year found that chemical weapons had been used in Syria, both by the national air force and ISIS militants. It found two instances where regime forces had used chlorine as a chemical weapon, and one where ISIS had used mustard gas between 2014 and 2015. The Syrian Coalition, an umbrella opposition group, compared the suspected chemical attack with one in Eastern Ghouta in 2013 "that the international community allowed to pass without accountability or punishment." A UN report found that the nerve agent sarin gas had been used to kill civilians in that attack, in which activists say around 1,400 people were killed. UN emergency meeting At an emergency meeting of the UN Security Council in New York, US ambassador and council president, Nikki Haley, held up photographs of children foaming at the mouth as evidence of the attack. "If Russia has the influence in Syria that it claims to have, we need to see them use it. We need to see them put an end to these horrific acts. How many more children have to die before Russia cares?" Haley hinted that the US was open to using military action in response. "When the UN consistently fails in its duty to act collectively, there are times in the life of states that we are compelled to take our own action," Haley said, adding that if the UN doesn't take action, "we may." Russia, Syria's most powerful ally, made clear it would not support a resolution put forward by the US, UK and France, which condemned the attack and required Syria to provide flight logs for Tuesday, the day of the attack. Russia has used its veto power as a permanent member of the Security Council at least seven times on Syrian resolutions. Syria's Deputy UN Ambassador Mounzer Mounzer flatly denied the reports, blaming "terrorist groups" for the dozens of deaths. "Syria also reaffirms that the Syrian Arab Army does not have any form or type of chemical weapons. We have never used them and we will never use them," he said. CNN's Ben Wedeman, Tamara Qiblawi, Eyad Kourdi, Lindsay Isaac, Onur Cakir, Richard Roth and Milena Veselinovic contributed to this report. 
1491411349	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/05/entertainment/barry-manilow-gay/index.html	Barry Manilow on coming out and his secret marriage - CNN.com	(CNN)For years Barry Manilow kept his sexuality a secret, fearful of how fans might react. "I thought I would be disappointing them if they knew I was gay," the legendary singer recently told People magazine. "So I never did anything." These days Manilow is not only out but on the cover of People talking about his private life and love of 39 years, his manager Garry Kief. It's a rare moment of openness for the 73-year-old star who told the publication, "I'm so private. I always have been." Manilow said he was focused mostly on his career, which included hits such as "Mandy" and "Copacabana (At the Copa)," when he met Kief, a TV executive, in 1978. "I knew that this was it," Manilow said. "I was one of the lucky ones. I was pretty lonely before that." The couple remained together despite Kief's initial lack of comfort with Manilow's fame, and they stayed discreetly under the radar. For a time, Manilow even lived with TV production assistant Linda Allen, who was rumored to be his love interest. The beloved performer's sexuality had long been the topic of speculation when he and Kief secretly married in 2014 at their Palm Springs, California, estate. The news made the headlines a year later, and Manilow publicly came out. Now he says he is happy with how it's all been received. "When (fans) found out that Garry and I were together, they were so happy," Manilow said. "The reaction was so beautiful -- strangers commenting, 'Great for you!' I'm just so grateful for it."  
1491411186	http://money.cnn.com/2017/04/05/news/economy/cfbp-director-cordray-republicans/index.html	House Republican: President Trump please fire CFPB Director Richard Cordray - Apr. 5, 2017	What is the CFPB? A top House Republican beseeched President Trump to fire Richard Cordray, the head of the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, pronto. Jeb Hensarling, chairman of the House Financial Services Committee, called on the president to dismiss Cordray "immediately." "I believe the president is clearly justified in dismissing you and I call upon the president -- yet again - to do just that, and to do it immediately," said Hensarling. Powered by SmartAsset.com SMARTASSET.COM Republicans want the former Ohio attorney general to be ousted and replaced with someone who holds their own views. GOP lawmakers have a long list of steps to overhaul the agency, including turning the agency into a commission run by several people rather than one and handing over control of its budget to Congress. But the 2010 Dodd-Frank reform law that created the independent agency states the president can't fire the director without cause. Related: Barney Frank defends consumer agency from 'conservative assault' "Republicans have been clamoring to weaken, impede, and ultimately destroy the Consumer Bureau since its creation," said Maxine Waters, a top Democrat on the panel. She told Cordray she hopes the president "would have the wisdom to ask you to stay on" until his term expires in July 2018. Critics of the agency, which is in charge of protecting consumers from unfair, deceptive or abusive practices, point to a court case that questions the constitutionality of the bureau having a single director. The CFPB challenged the October ruling, which gives the president the authority to fire the director. The agency has been granted a rehearing in May. Related: Justice Department says Trump has power to fire bank regulator The Justice Department has also stepped in to back that decision. In March, the department filed a legal brief arguing that the Constitution grants the president "the authority to remove executive branch agency heads at will," unless the agency is headed by a commission. "There is a greater risk that an 'independent' agency headed by a single person will engage in extreme departures from the President's executive policy," the DOJ wrote. CNNMoney (Washington) First published April 5, 2017: 12:53 PM ET
1491411122	http://money.cnn.com/2017/04/05/technology/germany-hate-speech/index.html	Facebook, Twitter face fines up to $53 million over hate speech - Apr. 5, 2017	Fake news sites designed to trick you Facebook, Twitter and other social media companies will be fined as much as €50 million ($53 million) in Germany if they fail to remove hate speech and fake news posts quickly. The German cabinet approved a plan to start imposing the fines on Wednesday. The draft bill will still have to be considered by the German parliament and other bodies before it becomes a law. "The providers of social networks are responsible when their platforms are misused to propagate hate crimes and fake news," justice minister Heiko Maas said in a statement emailed to CNNMoney. He said that the companies must organize their complaints management in a way that allows obviously criminal content to be deleted promptly. The companies will have 24 hours to remove hate speech and fake news posts that breach German law after they are flagged by users. Other illegal content needs to be deleted within 7 days of reporting. Social networks are already required to remove illegal content from their websites as soon as they are aware of it, according to German law. The new fines, Maas said, are there to make sure they comply with the law. Related: Google under fire for posting government ads on hate videos Facebook (FB, Tech30), Twitter (TWTR, Tech30), Microsoft (MSFT, Tech30) and YouTube made a big public promise last May to review a majority of content flagged by users within 24 hours. Any racist, violent or illegal posts would be deleted, they said. However, German officials said the companies are failing to meet the target. "Our problem is that too few [pieces of] criminal content are deleted by the social networks," Maas said. He pointed to a research by Jugendschutz, a German body for the protection of minors on the Internet, which said Facebook only deletes 39% of reported criminal content. Facebook said it works "very hard to remove illegal content" from its platform and is determined to work with others to solve the problem. "As experts have pointed out, this legislation would force private companies rather than the courts to become the judges of what is illegal in Germany," it said in a statement. Twitter was not immediately available to comment on the announcement. The government holds majority in the parliament and the bill is expected to move through the legislative process swiftly. Maas said the government wants the bill to become law before the general election in September. Free speech activists and tech companies have in the past criticized the plan, saying it could damage free speech. Maas said freedom of expression has a "huge meaning" in German democracy. "Even repulsive and ugly utterances -- even lies can be covered by freedom of expression," he said. "However: freedom of expression ends where criminal law begins...anyone who spreads criminal content on the Internet must be consistently prosecuted and brought to justice," he added. CNNMoney (London) First published April 5, 2017: 11:44 AM ET
1491412263	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/01/sport/2017-nba-playoffs-preview/index.html	2017 NBA playoffs: Will it be Cavs-Warriors III? - CNN.com	(CNN)As teams make the final push toward the NBA playoffs, not much has changed from a year ago. That's because the same question looms as it did in 2016: Can anyone stop the Golden State Warriors? The regular season ends April 12. The playoffs start April 15. Sure, LeBron James and the Cleveland Cavaliers are the defending NBA champions, and they're a favorite to return to the NBA Finals for the third consecutive year. But the talk all season has been about the super team assembled in Golden State, having added Kevin Durant to an already loaded roster with Stephen Curry, Draymond Green and Klay Thompson. A year after setting the NBA regular-season wins record with 73, the Warriors once again are at the top of the Western Conference heading into April. As in 2016, Golden State is closing in on home-court advantage for the postseason, with the San Antonio Spurs close behind. The Warriors aren't on the blistering pace they were last year, and they're currently without Durant, who has been out the past month because of a sprained medial collateral ligament and bone bruise in his left knee. The team is hopeful Durant will be back for the postseason. On Wednesday, the Warriors said Durant "has made very good progress" and "a return to game action prior to the end of the regular season remains a possibility." But even if Durant isn't available, the 2016 runners-up and 2015 champs are still title favorites. Can anyone else make waves in the West? The Spurs -- in the playoffs for the 20th consecutive season -- are 2-1 against the Warriors this season. The Houston Rockets, led by MVP candidate James Harden, are making a run as well. However, they went 1-3 against the Warriors in the regular season. In the Eastern Conference, the Cavaliers don't have a stranglehold on the top spot. This year, the reigning champs are in a battle with the Boston Celtics for the No. 1 seed, and having home-court advantage could be pivotal should the two teams face each other in a best-of-seven series in the Eastern Conference finals. And lately, Cleveland hasn't rocked. The Cavs went 7-10 in the month of March and have dropped five out of their last eight games. "We're just in a bad spot right now," James said after losing to the Chicago Bulls on Thursday. "Not disappointed with the effort. We're just in a bad spot. We're going to try to figure it out." Also lurking nearby in the East are the Toronto Raptors, who reached the Eastern Conference finals last season, and the Washington Wizards. Additionally, look out for potential upsets in the early rounds. Depending on where they're seeded, triple-double machine Russell Westbrook and the Oklahoma City Thunder could scare a first-round opponent in the West. Westbrook has 39 triple doubles, two away from tying Oscar Robertson for the most in a season. In the East, the Miami Heat -- who started the season 11-30 -- have been scorching down the stretch. Now, it appears they'll reach the playoffs and will be a team no one wants to play. But make no mistake: Everyone is chasing Golden State. And for the third year in a row, a Cavs-Warriors NBA Finals is a real possibility. Will it happen again? Stay tuned.  
1491412202	http://money.cnn.com/2017/04/05/media/donald-trump-defends-bill-oreilly/index.html	Trump defends Bill O'Reilly: 'I don't think Bill did anything wrong' - Apr. 5, 2017	Lisa Bloom wants Fox News investigated President Donald Trump on Wednesday weighed in on the recent controversy surrounding Fox News host Bill O'Reilly. In an interview with The New York Times, Trump defended O'Reilly against new revelations that he, Fox News and parent company 21st Century Fox had paid a total of $13 million in settlements to five women who accused him of sexual harassment or verbal abuse. "I think he's a person I know well — he is a good person," Trump told the Times. "I think he shouldn't have settled; personally I think he shouldn't have settled. Because you should have taken it all the way. I don't think Bill did anything wrong." O'Reilly has denied the merits of all the claims against him, 21st Century Fox said in a statement. Trump similarly defended former Fox News chief Roger Ailes last year, when Ailes was facing a litany of sexual harassment allegations. "I think they are unfounded just based on what I've read," Trump said of the accusations against Ailes. "Totally unfounded, based on what I read." Ailes, who has denied all of the allegations against him, was forced to resign from Fox News just one week after that interview. Related: Companies pull ads from 'The O'Reilly Factor' in growing backlash Nine months after Ailes' departure, Fox News is facing mounting public pressure from accusers, advertisers and women's rights groups to go further in addressing the allegations against O'Reilly. More than 20 companies had pulled their advertising from "The O'Reilly Factor" as of Wednesday. Lisa Bloom, the lawyer for one of O'Reilly's accusers, has called for an independent investigation of Fox News. The National Organization for Women has called for him to be fired. Meanwhile, many female employees inside Fox News are too scared to speak out about problems in the workplace, fearing that they have no leverage against powerful on-air talents like O'Reilly, current and former network sources have told CNNMoney. Related: At Fox News, fear and silence amid O'Reilly controversy 21st Century Fox and Fox News are standing behind O'Reilly. But neither the company nor O'Reilly have addressed the matter since Saturday, when the New York Times first revealed the extent of settlements paid to O'Reilly's accusers. Henry Holt, the publisher of O'Reilly's new book "Old School," has said it has "no comment at this time" on the allegations against its author. 21st Century Fox is also under federal investigation over its handling of payments made to women who accused Ailes of sexual harassment. CNNMoney (New York) First published April 5, 2017: 1:03 PM ET
1491412013	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/05/politics/trump-syria-comments-response/index.html	Trump leaves door open to new Syria policy after attack - CNNPolitics.com	Washington (CNN)President Donald Trump left the door open to new action in Syria in his first on-camera comments in response to a deadly suspected chemical attack in the Middle East. "You will see," Trump said when asked if he would take new action. Trump made the comments as he welcomed Jordan's King Abdullah to the Oval Office. "These are very troubled times in the Middle East, and we see what happened just recently yesterday in Syria -- horrible. Horrible, horrible thing. Unspeakable," Trump said, later calling it a "terrible affront to humanity." World leaders expressed shock and outrage Tuesday at reports of the suspected targeted attack in northwestern Syria that killed scores of civilians, with one UK official suggesting the incident amounted to a war crime. Activists said the Syrian regime was responsible for killing dozens of people, including many children, leading the United Nations to replace a scheduled Security Council session for Wednesday morning with an emergency meeting. Syrian President Bashar al-Assad's military denied using chemical weapons and blamed rebels for the carnage. Russia, Syria's strong ally, said it had no warplanes in the vicinity. But from Washington to London to Jerusalem, leaders denounced the reported airstrike, which if proven true would be one of the deadliest chemical attacks in Syria in years. CNN's Kareem Khadder, Schams Elwazer, Elizabeth Roberts, Eyad Kourdi and Tamara Qiblawi contributed to this report. 
1491411994	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/05/entertainment/heath-ledger-documentary/index.html	'Heath Ledger' trailer debuts - CNN.com	(CNN)Had he lived, Heath Ledger would have turned 38 years old Tuesday. Instead his fans received a gift: The first look at an intimate documentary about the late star. The trailer for "I Am Heath Ledger" debuted online Tuesday. The film, which is set to premiere at the Tribeca Film Festival on April 23, offers new glimpses into the life of the actor, who died from a prescription medication overdose in 2008 when he was 28. It also features interviews with those who knew the "Dark Knight" and "Brokeback Mountain" star best, including musician Ben Harper, director Ang Lee and Ledger's sister, Kate. "Heath was the most alive human," Harper says in the trailer. "And if it wasn't on the edge, it didn't interest him." The doc also shows Ledger, who loved filming video in his spare time, shooting with various cameras. "We're gonna go on a mission right now," Ledger says as he looks into one camera. "Yeah, so will you come with me?" The project is the result of a partnership between acclaimed filmmaker Derik Murray, Network Entertainment, and Spike TV. The film will get a limited run in theaters on May 3 and debut on Spike TV May 17.  
1491411965	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/05/europe/french-election-debate-le-pen-macron/index.html	French election: Macron marches on, Le Pen loses out - CNN.com	Paris (CNN)The latest chapter in the seemingly never-ending drama that is the French Presidential campaign brought yet more fireworks Tuesday as candidates clashed on stage in the latest televised debate. For the first time in France's history, all 11 presidential hopefuls were included in a production which lasted four hours, ahead of the first round of voting on April 23. But who looks set to move into the Élysée Palace? And which candidates can say "au revoir" to their hopes of becoming president? Here's what you missed ... The winners It was another good night for Jean-Luc Mélenchon, the far-left candidate, who has been gaining in popularity. This format suits his combative and spontaneous style, allowing him to outflank his opponents. He shone through, engaging with the audience, scoring points and managing to raise laughter. He was in good company, with four of the 11 candidates hailing from the hard left. But as in the last debate, this was always Emmanuel Macron's contest to lose. He's looking more and more likely to make it through to the second round of voting on May 7, along with far-right National Front leader Marine Le Pen. Once more, the centrist candidate emerged relatively unscathed, fighting his corner and landing some metaphorical blows on Le Pen. There was also success for the smaller candidates, especially Philippe Poutou, the left-wing radical who describes himself as a laborer. Boasting a casual look -- he'd rejected the traditional debate-wear of jacket and tie -- he took the fight to Le Pen and the embattled Republic candidate Francois Fillon -- both of whom are the subject of judicial inquiries. Poutou won praise in the French press for his performance -- though he has next to no chance of winning the election. The losers It was a night to forget for National Front leader Le Pen, who was far quieter this time around. Perhaps the fact that she was surrounded by so many opponents made it difficult for her to make headway while repeatedly being attacked. The problem for Le Pen is that she's vulnerable. She came into the debate under scrutiny after members of her staff were accused by officials of being paid for non-existent jobs at the European Parliament. Read more: Scandal and intrigue: France's presidential election She initially admitted they had been paid while not working, according to the European Anti-Fraud Office (OLAF). But she later denied having said so. Then there's her fractious relationship with Europe, which was exacerbated when European lawmakers voted to rescind her parliamentary immunity over a case involving violent images she posted on Twitter. An inquiry was opened under a French law which bans the distribution of violent images, after Le Pen tweeted images of killings by ISIS militants in December 2015. Le Pen's attempt to persuade voters that her party has changed was hit last month, when one of its counselors was suspended over allegations of Holocaust denial, after he was caught on camera playing down the systematic murder of six million Jews. Related: France's controversial election campaign, explained That scandal also allowed Macron to land one of the lines of the night, accusing her of failing to drag her party away from the racist rhetoric which was often used under the leadership of her father, Jean-Marie Le Pen. Le Pen, the Front National's founder, was expelled from the party in 2015 after making comments denying the Holocaust. Macron seized on the latest incident, telling her: "You repeat the lies that were heard in your father's mouth." Le Pen also drew criticism from her rivals for stating that France had become a "university for jihadists" -- a statement which infuriated her left-wing opponents. What did the viewers make of it? For all the drama the debate provided, there remains a sense that little was done to help undecided voters make up their minds. The format meant each candidate had just over 15 minutes to speak, making it difficult for them to really get their teeth into the main issues. Read more: Why Europe is happy gambling with its politics Many people CNN spoke to came away feeling more frustrated than convinced. Indeed, the recurring phrase heard from viewers in the wake of the debate was "on est vraiment dans la merde" -- which translates politely as "we really are in quite a mess." CNN's James Masters, Maud le Rest and Lina Agabani Puch contributed to this report. 
1491412990	http://www.cnn.com/2015/06/05/living/riley-curry-stephen-moments-nba-feat/index.html	Riley Curry's 7 most adorable moments - CNN.com	Editor's note: This story was first published in June of 2016. (CNN)Though she may have irritated a few sports reporters who were trying to ask questions, 2-year-old Riley Curry has stolen the hearts of basketball and non-basketball fans alike. Riley may even be a bigger Internet sensation than her MVP father, Stephen Curry of the Golden State Warriors, who is playing in his first NBA Finals. Riley first made a splash when she appeared with her dad during a postgame interview on May 19. She waved to reporters, hid under the table and told her father to "be quiet." She became an overnight hit, and the Warriors continued winning, eliminating the Houston Rockets in five games. Now matched against the Cleveland Cavaliers and star LeBron James, Curry and his family have remained positive, despite the brightening spotlight. In a special for Time, Stephen's wife, Ayesha, wrote that "the attention has brought us closer." She praised how Stephen handled Riley's presence during the interviews. He did not ignore his daughter in the moment, affirming Ayesha's stance on parenting. "I feel that the biggest thing you can do, as a parent, is to engage," she wrote. "You can never be too busy for your child." That attention has not seemed to distract Stephen Curry, whose team is tied with the Cavs through two games in the Finals series. And it has given many of us an even greater opportunity to fall in love with Riley. Here are seven top moments of Riley's short career so far: A kiss for her father Riley delivered a good-luck kiss to her father before his first NBA Finals game. A kiss for her grandfather Her kisses are not reserved just for Stephen, either. Her grandfather Dell Curry received one during Game 2 of the Finals. Hold my gum, please Before she played peek-a-boo with her father, Riley handed her gum to a Warriors employee. How to celebrate a victory In celebration of the Warriors' Game 1 victory over the Cavaliers, Riley took to the dance floor. All smiles in a shower of confetti Riley beamed in her father's arms after his team's series-clinching win over the Rockets. Blessed She used the microphone to showcase her singing ability with a line from Big Sean's "Blessings." Peek-a-boo The Warriors' biggest victory in 40 years did not stop Riley from playing a game of peek-a-boo with her father. Her hiding place of choice: behind the curtain.  
1491412925	http://money.cnn.com/2017/04/04/technology/nfl-amazon-livestreaming/index.html	NFL partners with Amazon to stream games this season - Apr. 4, 2017	5 stunning stats about the NFL The NFL has partnered with Amazon (AMZN, Tech30) to livestream "Thursday Night Football" during the upcoming season. The one-year deal includes 10 games and will cost Amazon $50 million. The games will be available around the world to anyone with an Amazon Prime subscription, which costs $99 a year. Amazon said that includes tens of millions of people. Twitter had the Thursday night rights last year, so anyone with a free account could view the games. Twitter (TWTR, Tech30), Facebook (FB, Tech30) and YouTube were in the running for the 2017 streaming rights for Thursday night. Related: NFL pledges to cut down on commercial breaks to speed up games When the NFL partnered with Twitter last year for its first streaming deal, it was something of an experiment. Viewership didn't compare with TV, but it was generally considered a success. The stream was high quality, easy to find on the app and users didn't report major glitches. For the first game on Twitter, about 243,000 people were watching during an average minute. About 15.4 million people watched on CBS and the NFL Network by the same measurement. Twitter's stream of the first game reached a total of 2.1 million people. But that figure counts anyone who watched the game for at least three seconds. Related: Twitter to stream eSports events The NFL's decision to stream games is a way to attract viewers who use social media and value mobility, as well as those who don't have cable. CNNMoney (New York) First published April 4, 2017: 8:35 PM ET
1491412875	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/05/politics/steve-bannon-white-house-national-security-council/index.html	Steve Bannon removed from National Security Council role - CNNPolitics.com	Washington (CNN)Steve Bannon, President Donald Trump's chief strategist, has been removed from his permanent seat at the National Security Council, multiple sources tell CNN, moving the council into a more traditional structure. The decision, which one source with knowledge said was made by Trump himself, comes after the President in January authorized the reorganization of the National Security Council to include Bannon as a permanent member of the panel. The move is a demotion for Bannon and a win for H.R. McMaster, who Trump picked in February to lead the council after Michael Flynn was fired for misleading Vice Presiden Mike Pence about undisclosed contacts he had with Russian operatives. McMaster, an Army lieutenant general, has to date struggled to gain tangible influence inside the White House, including in issues of hiring and firing. Bannon's title was removed from the standing list of members of the National Security Council in a regulatory filing posted Wednesday, first reported by Bloomberg. McMaster up, Bannon down The decision to remove Bannon from the council is the first public diminishing of his power inside the West Wing, two senior Republicans close to the White House noted. One official was skeptical of the pro-Bannon spin from sources saying he was only there to keep eye on Flynn. The argument that Bannon was on the council to watch Flynn ignores that fact that the former campaign adviser was Trump's top pick for national security adviser and someone the President has defended even after he asked for his resignation in February. "General Flynn is a wonderful man. I think he has been treated very, very unfairly by the media, as I call it, the fake media in many cases," Trump said after Flynn left. "And I think it is really a sad thing that he was treated so badly." Bannon, the source said, will still be allowed to "attend any meeting" where his expertise is needed, a more traditional structure for the National Security Council. Ultimately, this is a diminishing move for him, official says, but "empowering for McMaster." 'Babysitting' Multiple sources looked to minimize the removal. One argued that Bannon was put on the council to ensure that it no longer "micro-managed" foreign policy and was put on a more "operational track." Other sources argued that Bannon was elevated to the council in order to keep tabs on Flynn. One source with knowledge described Bannon's job as "babysitting" Flynn on the council. Another said Bannon was only on board to oversee Flynn's work to "de-operationalize" the National Security Council from the broad purview it had under Susan Rice, President Barack Obama's national security adviser. A source with knowledge of the move said Bannon can "still attend any meeting" where his expertise is needed. "In all the time he was there, he only attended one principals meeting," the source said. "He is still welcome to attend principal meetings." Controversial move The decision to elevate Bannon in the first place was a controversial one because, at the same time, the order indicated that the director of national intelligence and the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff would not be regular attendees. The committee is a Cabinet-level group of agencies focused on national security that was established by President George H.W. Bush in 1989. Regular members of the Principals Committee will include the secretary of state, the treasury secretary, the defense secretary, the attorney general, the secretary of Homeland Security, the assistant to the President and chief of staff, the assistant to the President and chief strategist, the national security adviser and the Homeland Security adviser. Former acting CIA chief Michael Morell sharply criticized the move in January, calling it "unprecedented" in an appearance on "CBS This Morning." "I have never been to a principals' meeting where the views of the DNI and the views of the chairman are not relevant," said Morell, who advised Hillary Clinton's campaign for president. "Every principals' meeting starts with an intelligence briefing by the DNI." Bannon's accession also demonstrated the breadth of his influence inside the White House, signaling that the former head of Brietbart News' influence extended beyond politics and domestic policy. CNN's Nicole Gaouette, Joe Johns and Jim Acosta contributed to this report. 
1491412801	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/05/us/severe-weather/index.html	Storms in Southeast: Tornado emergency issued for Sumter County, Georgia - CNN.com	(CNN)The National Weather Service issued a tornado emergency for Sumter County in southwest Georgia at 1 p.m. Wednesday, a rare incident only used when confirmed tornadoes are likely to cause catastrophic damage. The emergency warning was part of a system of storms barreling toward the Southeastern United States expected to leave nearly 60 million people at risk of tornadoes, damaging winds and thunderstorms Wednesday, according to a CNN forecast. A storms will affect Alabama, Florida, Georgia and South Carolina before moving into the Ohio and Tennessee valleys, according to the National Weather Service. The storms are expected to come in two waves: one in the morning, and another in the afternoon and evening. The National Weather Service issued a tornado watch for the broad area, which means that conditions are favorable for severe weather. Strong winds and baseball-size hail are expected in parts of Alabama, where Gov. Robert Bentley declared a state of emergency ahead of the weather event. Jake Reed, a meteorologist for CNN affiliate WHNT-TV in Huntsville, Alabama, issued a stark warning of the coming storm on Facebook, saying it was "far and away the biggest threat Alabama has seen in quite some time." "The storms that form in the afternoon have the potential to pose a significant threat to life and property," he wrote. In Georgia, there's also a chance for isolated tornadoes and hail, National Weather Service meteorologist Matthew Sena told CNN. Due to the weather, the Federal Aviation Administration issued a ground stop for flights at Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport just after 9 a.m. Delays are expected as the storm hits the area. The weather system is also expected to bring heavy rains to the Interstate 20 corridor, including metro Atlanta, according to the National Weather Service. Rainfall amounts will average 1.5 to 2 inches, and a flash flood watch has been issued for that area, according to the weather service. The severe weather could last longer than Monday's storms and affect cities such as Atlanta and Augusta before it moves north by the end of the day, Sena said. At least five people died when a severe storm system swept through several Southern states over the weekend and Monday. CNN's Haley Brink and Dave Hennen contributed to this report. 
1491412431	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/03/sport/steve-nash-nba-playoff-analysis/index.html	NBA: Steve Nash talks MVP race and playoff picture - CNN.com	(CNN)Two-time NBA MVP Steve Nash suggests this year's MVP race between triple-double threat Russell Westbrook and assists leader James Harden is too close to call, but he would relish watching a first-round matchup between the two. "I almost feel sheepish picking anyone," says Nash, who reached the Western Conference Finals four times during his storied career, but fell just short of competing in an NBA Finals. As a player development consultant with the Golden State Warriors, Nash has another crack at a championship ring. Hired in September 2015, the eight-time All-Star was reportedly instrumental in helping Golden State sign Kevin Durant during the offseason. He shares his thoughts with CNN on the extraordinary MVP race, the Warriors' title chances and LeBron James' heavy workload this season. CNN: Which team has the ability to surprise people in the playoffs? "I don't think they are a surprise anymore, but it's been great to see Boston take the next step. Obviously, being in the Eastern Conference, they have to go to through Cleveland. But they've been pretty solid from start to finish, so that's been exciting. "And then in the West you have tons of talented teams throughout the conference. It's been great to see Houston take another step with James Harden and Eric Gordon, but I still don't see Houston being able to get out of the West." Houston and Oklahoma City are currently slated to play each other in the first round, with Harden and Russell Westbrook dominating the ball as much as any players in history. Are you dreading or relishing watching this series? "I think it can be great. Houston has the advantage because they have done a better job of utilizing all their players and sharing the ball. I think that recently Westbrook has been -- how can I say this -- a little more democratic about getting the ball to his guys. Russell is going to need that in the playoffs. "He's going to need guys like Steven Adams and Victor Oladipo and some of his shooters to get involved and help carry the load. Because in the playoffs, you're playing the same team over and over, and they get your tendencies and understand what you're trying to accomplish. "(Westbrook) has been noticing lately that he's going to need his teammates to share some of the burden; if they can do that, that can make them a better team. But if not, then I think that Houston will advance." Who is your MVP? "Oh man. You know, I keep saying that the MVP is such a subjective thing that it almost says more about the voter than it does about the players. So I almost feel sheepish picking anyone. "I like Harden in that he's brought his whole team to another level, and at the same time I think that Westbrook is having a historic season. "But I really admire Kawhi Leonard. What he does with (the San Antonio Spurs), in terms of how good they are, he is probably underrated in certain respects. He has taken the next step as far as being a finisher in the fourth quarters, and we all know what he can do defensively." Is this now or never for the Los Angeles Clippers? "Probably, yeah. They are probably at an age where if they don't do something profound this year then there will be too much pressure to change something. "If they don't get to the Western Conference Finals and look like they are building, then I think change will be inevitable." Aside from injuries, what could trouble Golden State and Cleveland? "I think both teams compete (hard), and this could be their third straight Finals. "For Cleveland, LeBron logging heavy minutes, and I think for Golden State, having six new players (can be risky). "When you go deep in the playoffs and things are going well, you have that common experience in the arena: When you look across at that other guy and he knows, that you know, that he knows that everything is going to be fine. "Whereas if you're brand new to a team, then you haven't really been in that heightened of a situation. Sometimes that can go missing." READ: The $325 million question: Why are baseball players so rich? READ: Should sports stars get political? Are we going to see a third straight rematch in the Finals? "I wouldn't bet against it. I think that Cleveland is going to turn it up here in the playoffs. They are pretty tough, and it means a lot to those guys, and they've gotten there before." And finally, are you going to pick a winner? I know you're a Golden State man right now. "If I were a betting man I would pick the Warriors. They have a great team, and when they are firing on all cylinders I think they'll be the team to beat." Steve Nash appears courtesy of the Allstate NABC Good Works Team, which awards 10 college basketball players for their extraordinary community service. 
1491413232	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/05/entertainment/thats-so-raven-sequel/index.html	'That's So Raven' sequel is happening - CNN.com	(CNN)A decade after it went off the air, "That's So Raven" is officially getting a sequel. Disney has ordered "Raven's Home," which is set to go into production this month. Raven-Symoné and Anneliese van der Pol will reprise their roles as best friends Raven Baxter and Chelsea Daniels. This time around the pair are "divorced single mothers raising their two separate families in one chaotic, but fun household full of friends." "When one of Raven's kids begins to show signs that they have inherited her trait of catching glimpses of the future, the already hectic household gets turned upside down, keeping even Raven on her toes," according to a statement announcing the show. The two actresses have remained friends over the years, and in 2015 they thrilled fans when they gave a surprise performance of the "That's So Raven" theme song in New York. 'Good Burger' and 'That's So Raven' stars reunite Raven-Symoné announced last year she was leaving ABC's "The View" to develop the spinoff of her hit children's show, which ran on Disney from 2003 to 2007. Gary Marsh, president and chief creative officer of Disney Channels Worldwide, welcomed her return. "There is only one Raven -- and for over 25 years, she has blessed audiences around the world with the greatest gift of all -- the pure, unadulterated joy of laugh-out-loud funny," he said in a statement. "After being a part of over 20 different Disney projects, we are thrilled to be bringing Raven home to Disney Channel once again." The star will also be an executive producer on the new series, which is scheduled to air sometime this year.  
1491413098	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/05/health/movie-villains-skin-dermatology-study/index.html	Doctors take a hard look at movie villains, warts and all - CNN.com	(CNN)The first thing people tend to notice about Crystal Hodges is her birthmark: a red and purple patch, called a port-wine stain, that covers the left side of her face. As a child, a bully likened her to a notorious Batman villain. "The name Two-Face is like nails on a chalkboard to my ears," she wrote on The Mighty, which publishes stories by people living with health conditions and disabilities. Hodges is an editor there. Most of the movie characters who come to mind who have distinctive facial features like she does, she recalled, are villains. And a report, published today in the Journal of the American Medical Association, illustrates what she's been saying all along. Beyond movie villains, she told CNN, "we're not represented in media or in books. We're kind of left out." For the new study, a team of dermatologists examined a handful of the top villains and heroes as ranked by the American Film Institute. Among the villains, they found a cluster of dark circles, abnormal skin colors, scars and warts. The trend goes back to the silent films of the early 1900s, when filmmakers relied on visual cues to show good and evil, according to the authors. The title vampire in the 1921 film "Nosferatu," for example, features a ghastly pale, hairless antagonist. But the trend continues today, the authors said, especially in a global cinema that relies heavily on established motifs. "They'll play scary music, and here you've got an image of a Bond villain or Freddy Krueger or Darth Vader that actually works internationally," said San Francisco dermatologist Dr. Vail Reese, one of the study's authors. Among the film institute's top villains were "Star Wars' " Darth Vader and Regan MacNeil from "The Exorcist," both of whom have facial scars, abnormal skin color and deep, dark circles around their eyes. In her elderly form, the queen from "Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs" has deep wrinkles and a wart on her unusually large, reddish nose, a condition known as rhinophyma. Even the Wicked Witch of the West, in addition to her green complexion, has a wart on her chin. The problem, Reese said, is that these portrayals impact, at least subconsciously, the way the public views real people living with differences that are only skin-deep. "If you have families across the country and their only encounter with someone who's albino was ... seeing this evil scary character, what happens when at the mall they see somebody with albinism?" asked Reese, whose website Skinema.com follows skin conditions in movies such as Leonardo DiCaprio's chapped lips in "The Revenant" and a young Ice Cube's missing moles in "Straight Outta Compton." There are exceptions on both sides of the American Film Institute list, Reese said. These include the clear-faced Norman Bates from "Psycho" and Tom Hanks' purple lesions in "Philadelphia" -- a skin condition known as Kaposi's sarcoma that is associated with AIDS. Even Hugh Jackman, of "Wolverine" fame, has brought attention to his real-life dealings with skin cancer. But these are only exceptions to the rule, Reese said. "If we continue to pair a particular look with (being a villain) ... then pretty soon, it's like Pavlov's dog: Simply seeing a person in that category is enough to prime thoughts of 'villain,' " said Mary Beth Oliver, a professor at Penn State University and co-director of its Media Effects Research Laboratory. She added that the same types of associations can happen with race and ethnicity. Oliver was not involved in the study, though she does conduct her own research on psychology and the media. Her latest work, yet unpublished, focuses on the "House of Cards" antihero Frank Underwood, played by Kevin Spacey. The project explores how people "have come to love Frank Underwood even if they know he's immoral," she said. But given the findings of Reese's analysis, she wondered, "Would we love Frank Underwood if he were physically repulsive?" The struggles of self-image Hodges is used to people's curiosity about her birthmark, but she was not prepared for her own photo to go viral. Nearly three years ago, she received an alarming message from a friend in another state. "Hey, I saw your picture on my newsfeed today," the friend told her. Someone had created a meme out of a photo Hodges had taken shortly after a laser treatment on the birthmark. It was reposted a number of times and seen by millions of people, she said. Because of the meme, people began to recognize her at stores and restaurants. "It never dawned on me how different I must look until that happened," Hodges said. "There's always going to be an ounce of my heart that's kind of broken from that experience." But rather than back away from the unwanted attention, Hodges saw it as an opportunity. She began writing blog posts and giving talks about her experience growing up looking different -- and the responses poured in. "There are a lot of women I've heard from who, their husbands have made them wear makeup to bed," Hodges said. She credits her parents, who "treated (her) like any other kid," for giving her the confidence to wear her birthmark proudly in public. But not all people with birthmarks, scars and other facial traits have thrived like she has. Skin conditions such as acne and alopecia, or hair loss, have been associated with mental health issues like anxiety and depression, according to Dr. Julie Amthor Croley, one of the study's authors and a dermatology resident at the University of Texas Medical Branch. "I think it certainly perpetuates the negative self-image that some of them harbor," said Croley. Playing the part Dennis Hurley doesn't just have a skin condition; he's in the acting business. And he said it affects the callbacks he gets. "I've auditioned for many, many serial killer roles," he said. Hurley is albino, a condition that affects the cells that produce pigment in his skin, hair and eyes. People with albinism typically have very pale skin and white hair. "I feel like people with the skin condition that I have have been classified as ... the butt of a joke or the scary albino," Hurley said, referring to characters like Whitey from the comedy "Me, Myself and Irene" and the twin henchmen from "The Matrix Reloaded." Hurley captured the attention of multiple news networks with his parody of "The Da Vinci Code," whose villain, Silas, is also albino. The film sparked outrage among the albino community, with the National Organization for Albinism and Hypopigmentation taking a public stance against the film. Although Hurley originally submitted for that role, he said he was not tall enough to audition. The part eventually went to Paul Bettany, who is not albino. "That's a role that I could've done without makeup," Hurley said. One role that didn't hinge upon his albinism, though, was his part as the grocery store worker in the music video for Justin Timberlake's "Can't Stop the Feeling." "The fact that I was in the Justin Timberlake video was pretty amazing." he said. "They hired me on my dancing skills alone." Flipping the script Many movie villains physically transform to match what's on the inside, Reese said. Dr. Evil's son, played by Seth Green in the "Austin Powers" movies, loses his hair as his behavior becomes more and more nefarious, matching his father. Linda Blair's demonically possessed character in "The Exorcist" also undergoes a physical transformation. "Before she's possessed, she's this fair-skinned redhead," Reese said. "Not only does the devil take her over, cause her to vomit and twist her head around ... but she gets these incredible scars and lacerations, and her skin color changes." "It's the whole idea that the skin lesions reflect the evil within an individual," he added. Hodges acknowledges that people often conflate inside and out, adding stigma to those who look different. "I think it's sad that we feel that we have to hide ... because society says it's not normal or healthy," she said. But Hodges decided that she would do exactly the opposite: She would become as visible as possible and set a positive example. In an effort to embrace her appearance last year, Hodges invited 50 artists to draw her in their own styles. She was depicted as a Lego character, a mermaid, a Disney princess and a superhero. Many of the drawings prominently feature her birthmark, which is caused by an overgrowth of capillaries in the skin. She hoped the images would encourage people like her. "I wanted them to see, if we were (in movies), here's what we would look like," she said.  
1491413089	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/05/middleeast/syria-airstrike-idlib-how-it-unfolded/index.html	From airstrike to aftermath: How Syria attack unfolded - CNN.com	Editor's Note: This article contains extremely graphic images of dead children. All times are local. Nightmarish accounts continue to filter out of Khan Sheikhoun, the northern Syrian town still reeling from what is feared to be the deadliest chemical attack in the country in years. Investigations are underway to determine who was responsible for the Tuesday morning attack that left at least 70 dead, according to activists. This is how it unfolded, based on eyewitness accounts provided to CNN. 6:30 a.m.: Airstrike hits town center, chemical agent suspected An airstrike hit the town center of Khan Sheikhoun, emitting a "poisonous gas," Anas al-Diab, an activist with the Aleppo Media Center (AMC) says. Casualties are reported to have died from asphyxiation caused by exposure to an unknown gas or chemical agent. The injured are initially treated at a makeshift clinic near the scene and Al-Rahma hospital, among others. Doctors Without Borders medics who visit the area's hospitals later say some victims appear to have symptoms consistent with exposure to a neurotoxic agent "such as Sarin gas or similar compounds." Three more strikes reported Five minutes later, three additional strikes reportedly hit the town center, al-Diab says. This time there are no descriptions of gas. At this point it is unclear if the planes involved are Syrian, but the rebel-held city is regularly targeted from the air by the Syrian military and its ally, Russia. Russia later denies having warplanes in the vicinity. Casualties arrive at hospital Warning: This section contains extremely graphic images of dead children. Fares al-Jundi, a doctor who lives in a nearby village, hurries to the Maarat al-Numan hospital immediately after the airstrikes. "I've never seen anything like it, beyond description," he tells CNN as he describes the horrifying scenes. Al-Jundi estimates up to 500 people have been brought in; the wounded cover entire floors, from the patients' rooms and operating theaters and any remaining space in the corridors. "I believe this horrible memory will stay with me for the rest of my life," he continues. Chaos on the ground Hadi al Abdullah, an activist journalist, arrives on scene two hours after the initial attack. Abdullah, who is suffering from blurred vision, a splitting headache and lethargy -- common side-effects of exposure to nerve gas -- says the scene is chaotic. He tells CNN that that people were not initially aware of the presence of a toxic agent. Some who rushed to help are overwhelmed by the gas, including several members of the Syrian Civil Defense (SCD), or White Helmets, who have to be rescued by others from the group. Abdullah says around 30 wounded people have gone to Turkey for treatment. Hospitals targeted in follow-up airstrikes, activists say The makeshift clinic and Al-Rahma hospital, where the injured are being triaged, are targeted in new airstrikes four hours after the chemical attack, Idlib's health directorate and the SCD say in a joint press release. Videos emerge on social media Videos, which appear to be from the scene, are posted quickly to social media platforms. Mohammed Hardan, who works for AMC, says he was at al-Rahma hospital when it was targeted by aerial bombardment, posting footage of the incident hours later. White Helmets: Residents targeted by poison gas Warning: This section contains graphic images of dead children. The White Helmets say at least 50 people, including women and children, have been killed by "poisonous gases." 70 dead, activists say AMC activists say the Syrian regime is behind the attack and says at least 70 people are dead. It adds that 45 bodies have been identified so far. Syrian army denies chemical attack On Tuesday evening, Syrian President Bashar al-Assad's military "categorically denies" using chemical weapons and blames "terrorist" groups for the carnage. But many in the international community blame the Assad regime for the outrage. WEDNESDAY: Turkey says it has evidence of chemical attack Recep Akdag, Turkey's Health Minister, tells Turkish media: ''We have findings that suggest there was a chemical attack. We are sending these findings to World Health Organization as well after documenting them. Humanity should not remain insensitive to this issue." Turkey's Health Ministry later says 29 victims are being treated at six hospitals, and that three victims have died after their arrival. Survivors recall the horror Survivors who made it to the Reyhanli Hospital on the Turkey-Syria border say they saw a plane drop chemical bombs. Mazin Yusif, 13, tells CNN that he found his grandfather slumped over in front of his house shortly after the strike and ran for help. "I got dizzy and then fainted in front of my grandfathers garage. I next found myself here in this hospital, naked in a bed," he adds. 31-year-old Ahmed Abdel Rahim was also caught up in the strike. "I was in my house," he tells CNN. "I had difficulty breathing, but I feel better now. But I did throw up after getting to the hospital. I don't know if my family is dead or alive. I don't know anything." CNN's Ben Wedeman, Kareem Khadder, Schams Elwazer, Elizabeth Roberts, Eyad Kourdi, Tamara Qiblawi, Angela Dewan, Eliza Mackintosh and Euan McKirdy contributed to this report. 
1491413014	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/05/politics/un-security-council-resolution-syria/index.html	Haley: If UN won't act on Syria, US may - CNNPolitics.com	Washington (CNN)US Ambassador to the United Nations Nikki Haley strongly condemned Russia and the Syrian government Wednesday over the chemical weapons attack on civilians, suggesting that the US is open to using military action to solve the country's ongoing civil war. "When the UN consistently fails in its duty to act collectively, there are times in the life of states that we are compelled to take our own action," Haley said. Haley, who is also the UN Security Council president, was speaking as the council considers a resolution condemning the Assad regime for the attack, which killed dozens, including many children. Russia, which backs the regime of Syrian President Bashar al-Assad, is likely to veto the resolution. "How many more children have to die before Russia cares?" Haley said as she displayed photos of the victims. Her comments are the most direct threat of unilateral action by the US delegation at the UN to solve the Syria crisis. The remarks are especially notable as the Trump administration has struck a more lenient tone on the regime of Assad, breaking with the Obama administration in demanding he abdicate power. Representatives from the US, United Kingdom and France have ‎circulated a draft resolution demanding that the Syrian government provide flight logs from Tuesday, the day of the attack, which killed dozens, including many children. The draft also calls for meetings with Syrian generals or other officers. The resolution explicitly condemns the use of chemical weapons within Syria and states that their use represents a threat to international peace and security. An emergency Security Council meeting was called at UN headquarters in response to the suspected targeted attack. The Syrian military under Assad has denied responsibility for the attack, claiming it would never use chemical weapons. Multiple countries denounced the attack on Wednesday before and during the Security Council hearing. Bahram Qasemi, a spokesperson for Iran's Foreign Ministry, said the country "strongly condemns" the use of chemical weapons in Syria "regardless of the perpetrators and the victims." France's UN ambassador, François Delattre, said of the attack: "That reminds us of the day of the regime's attack on Damascus. This chemical horror opens a new spiral into the abyss of the human tragedy." But Russian Foreign Ministry spokeswoman Maria Zakharova blasted the resolution, telling reporters Wednesday it was "unacceptable" and that it was drafted too quickly. The UK and Chinese ambassadors also exchanged sharp words over responsibility for UN inaction. UK Ambassador Matthew Rycroft condemned prior vetoes by China and Russia, which blocked international action on Syria. But China's Ambassador Liu Jieyi, in a rare diplomatic outburst, said the UK delegate should stop "abusing" the Security Council. CORRECTION: An earlier version of this story misquoted Haley. CNN's Bijan Hosseini and Radina Gigova contributed to this report. 
1491414237	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/05/politics/steve-bannon-white-house-national-security-council/index.html	Steve Bannon removed from National Security Council role - CNNPolitics.com	Washington (CNN)Steve Bannon, President Donald Trump's chief strategist, has been removed from his permanent seat at the National Security Council, multiple sources tell CNN, moving the council into a more traditional structure. The decision, which one source with knowledge said was made by Trump himself, comes after the President in January authorized the reorganization of the National Security Council to include Bannon as a permanent member of the panel. The move is a demotion for Bannon and a win for H.R. McMaster, who Trump picked in February to lead the council after Michael Flynn was fired for misleading Vice President Mike Pence about undisclosed contacts he had with Russian operatives. McMaster, an Army lieutenant general, has to date struggled to gain tangible influence inside the White House, including in issues of hiring and firing. Bannon's title was removed from the standing list of members of the National Security Council in a regulatory filing posted Wednesday, first reported by Bloomberg. McMaster up, Bannon down The decision to remove Bannon from the council is the first public diminishing of his power inside the West Wing, two senior Republicans close to the White House noted. One official was skeptical of the pro-Bannon spin from sources saying he was only there to keep eye on Flynn. The argument that Bannon was on the council to watch Flynn ignores that fact that the former campaign adviser was Trump's top pick for national security adviser and someone the President has defended even after he asked for his resignation in February. "General Flynn is a wonderful man. I think he has been treated very, very unfairly by the media, as I call it, the fake media in many cases," Trump said after Flynn left. "And I think it is really a sad thing that he was treated so badly." Bannon, the source said, will still be allowed to "attend any meeting" where his expertise is needed, a more traditional structure for the National Security Council. Ultimately, this is a diminishing move for him, official says, but "empowering for McMaster." 'Babysitting' Multiple sources looked to minimize the removal. One argued that Bannon was put on the council to ensure that it no longer "micro-managed" foreign policy and was put on a more "operational track." Other sources argued that Bannon was elevated to the council in order to keep tabs on Flynn. One source with knowledge described Bannon's job as "babysitting" Flynn on the council. Another said Bannon was only on board to oversee Flynn's work to "de-operationalize" the National Security Council from the broad purview it had under Susan Rice, President Barack Obama's national security adviser. A source with knowledge of the move said Bannon can "still attend any meeting" where his expertise is needed. "In all the time he was there, he only attended one principals meeting," the source said. "He is still welcome to attend principal meetings." Controversial move The decision to elevate Bannon in the first place was a controversial one because, at the same time, the order indicated that the director of national intelligence and the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff would not be regular attendees. The committee is a Cabinet-level group of agencies focused on national security that was established by President George H.W. Bush in 1989. Regular members of the Principals Committee will include the secretary of state, the treasury secretary, the defense secretary, the attorney general, the secretary of Homeland Security, the assistant to the President and chief of staff, the assistant to the President and chief strategist, the national security adviser and the Homeland Security adviser. Former acting CIA chief Michael Morell sharply criticized the move in January, calling it "unprecedented" in an appearance on "CBS This Morning." "I have never been to a principals' meeting where the views of the DNI and the views of the chairman are not relevant," said Morell, who advised Hillary Clinton's campaign for president. "Every principals' meeting starts with an intelligence briefing by the DNI." Bannon's accession also demonstrated the breadth of his influence inside the White House, signaling that the former head of Brietbart News' influence extended beyond politics and domestic policy. CNN's Nicole Gaouette, Joe Johns and Jim Acosta contributed to this report. 
1491414168	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/05/politics/adam-schiff-white-house-documents/index.html	Schiff: Trump promised documents, but WH staff is fighting release - CNNPolitics.com	(CNN)The top Democrat on the House Russia investigation, Rep. Adam Schiff, said Wednesday President Donald Trump personally promised documents at the center of "unmasking" allegations would be made available to all members of the House intelligence committee, but that White House staff is fighting those documents' release. "The President, when I met with him, said that he is happy to have whoever we wanted review the documents. His staff has opposed that, they were opposed to even letting my own staff review the documents, my staff director," Schiff told CNN Wednesday. "So we're still trying to get those documents for the full committee, we would like the White House's help if they are sincere about wanting to share this information and have the oversight functions performed, they are to be facilitating this." He added, "But as yet we have not been able to make those documents available to the full committee." CNN has reached out to the White House for comment on Schiff's characterization, and have not yet received a response. Schiff also said that he has signed on to two formal invites -- one inviting FBI Director James Comey and NSA Director Mike Rogers to return to the House Intelligence Committee and a second rescheduling the public hearing with former acting Attorney General Sally Yates, former CIA Director John Brennan and former Director of National Intelligence James Clapper. But Schiff said that House Intelligence Chairman Devin Nunes has not yet signed the letter to bring Yates, Brennan and Clapper before investigators. A Republican source responded to Schiff's comments by saying the committee "is committed to speaking to Comey, Rogers, Yates, Clapper, and Brennan, and the committee is now working out arrangements for all five of them to appear." "Because Comey and Rogers were unable to answer around 100 questions at their open hearing, there is discussion about whether the questions put to some of these witnesses can be answered in another open hearing or would require a classified setting," the source added. The White House intelligence documents have taken on greater importance in the two weeks since Nunes secretly traveled to the White House grounds to view them. The intelligence has formed the core of Trump's argument that former national security adviser Susan Rice spied on him, and Trump himself upped the ante in a New York Times interview saying he believed Rice committed a crime. Schiff first mentioned his issues obtaining those documents earlier Wednesday. "The White House clearly only wanted one person to see these documents, and that person was our chairman," Schiff said on CNN's "New Day," referring to Nunes' coordination with White House staff to review documents showing top Trump aides were picked up in "incidental" collection by US intelligence. "I want the full committees to be able to see that, and we're meeting resistance," Schiff said. "If these documents are so damning or so indicating of the President, as he suggests, why are they opposing efforts to provide them to the full committee? I think that's a question worthy of the White House answering." Schiff's accusation marks a turn from just one day ago, when he said that the White House promised to show its intelligence to the other members of the House intelligence committee. Some lawmakers even said they might travel to the White House as early as Tuesday afternoon to review the intelligence, but as of Wednesday morning, Schiff and Nunes were the only lawmakers to have seen the intelligence reports. The intelligence reports at the White House are at the center of two weeks of chaos that led top Democrats to call on Nunes to recuse himself from the House Russia investigation and, later, formed the core of Trump's argument that former national security adviser Susan Rice was responsible for surveillance against him. Since Rice's name first surfaced in conservative media outlets Monday, interest has grown in what the intelligence reports actually show. RELATED: House Russia investigators briefed on Nunes findings, White House trip possible House Democratic Leader Nancy Pelosi said Wednesday she plans to review the intelligence and doesn't "expect to" run into any resistance from the White House. "I expect that I will see that," Pelosi said Wednesday. She then accused Trump of making House Republicans look like "fools." "The White House has made fools of their allies in the House of Representatives in the way they've handled this," Pelosi said. "They cook up some intelligence. They bring the chairman of the committee -- a very distinguished position which he has tarnished -- they use him as a tool to tell him what they have cooked up, now you go tell the President what we have cooked up and try to represent to the American people that this is legitimate intelligence."  
1491414162	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/05/politics/trump-syria-comments-response/index.html	Trump: 'I now have responsibility' when it comes to Syria - CNNPolitics.com	Washington (CNN)President Donald Trump, speaking at a news conference on Wednesday, said the chemical attack against Syrian civilians "crossed a lot of lines for me" and changed the way he views Syria and leader Bashar al-Assad. "I now have responsibility, and I will have that responsibility and carry it very proudly," Trump said responding to a question about a White House statement Tuesday that blamed the attack in part on President Barack Obama. "It is now my responsibility. It was a great opportunity missed," Trump said. Trump did maintain that Obama's failure to respond to his red line threat "was a blank threat (that) set us back a long ways, not only in Syria but in many other parts of the world." The President condemned the attack as "heinous." "Yesterday's chemical attack, a chemical attack that was so horrific in Syria against innocent people, including women, small children and even beautiful little babies, their deaths were an affront to humanity," Trump said from the Rose Garden. "These heinous actions by the Assad regime cannot be tolerated. The United States stands with our allies across the globe to condemn this horrific attack and all other horrific attacks, for that matter." World leaders expressed shock and outrage Tuesday at reports of the suspected targeted attack in northwestern Syria that killed scores of civilians, with one UK official suggesting the incident amounted to a war crime. Activists said the Syrian regime was responsible for killing dozens of people, including many children, leading the United Nations to replace a scheduled Security Council session for Wednesday morning with an emergency meeting. Syrian President Bashar al-Assad's military denied using chemical weapons and blamed rebels for the carnage. Russia, Syria's strong ally, said it had no warplanes in the vicinity. Earlier in the day, Trump had left the door open to new action in Syria in his first on-camera comments in response to a deadly suspected chemical attack in the Middle East. "You will see," Trump said when asked if he would take new action, according to pool reporters present when Trump welcomed Jordan's King Abdullah to the Oval Office. "These are very troubled times in the Middle East, and we see what happened just recently yesterday in Syria -- horrible. Horrible, horrible thing. Unspeakable," Trump said, later calling it a "terrible affront to humanity." CNN's Kareem Khadder, Schams Elwazer, Elizabeth Roberts, Eyad Kourdi and Tamara Qiblawi contributed to this report. 
1491413784	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/05/middleeast/syria-airstrike-idlib-how-it-unfolded/index.html	From airstrike to aftermath: How Syria attack unfolded - CNN.com	Editor's Note: This article contains extremely graphic images of dead children. All times are local. Nightmarish accounts continue to filter out of Khan Sheikhoun, the northern Syrian town still reeling from what is feared to be the deadliest chemical attack in the country in years. Investigations are underway to determine who was responsible for the Tuesday morning attack that left at least 70 dead, according to activists. This is how it unfolded, based on eyewitness accounts provided to CNN. 6:30 a.m.: Airstrike hits town center, chemical agent suspected An airstrike hit the town center of Khan Sheikhoun, emitting a "poisonous gas," Anas al-Diab, an activist with the Aleppo Media Center (AMC) says. Casualties are reported to have died from asphyxiation caused by exposure to an unknown gas or chemical agent. The injured are initially treated at a makeshift clinic near the scene and Al-Rahma hospital, among others. Doctors Without Borders medics who visit the area's hospitals later say some victims appear to have symptoms consistent with exposure to a neurotoxic agent "such as Sarin gas or similar compounds." Three more strikes reported Five minutes later, three additional strikes reportedly hit the town center, al-Diab says. This time there are no descriptions of gas. At this point it is unclear if the planes involved are Syrian, but the rebel-held city is regularly targeted from the air by the Syrian military and its ally, Russia. Russia later denies having warplanes in the vicinity. Casualties arrive at hospital Warning: This section contains extremely graphic images of dead children. Fares al-Jundi, a doctor who lives in a nearby village, hurries to the Maarat al-Numan hospital immediately after the airstrikes. "I've never seen anything like it, beyond description," he tells CNN as he describes the horrifying scenes. Al-Jundi estimates up to 500 people have been brought in; the wounded cover entire floors, from the patients' rooms and operating theaters and any remaining space in the corridors. "I believe this horrible memory will stay with me for the rest of my life," he continues. Chaos on the ground Hadi al Abdullah, an activist journalist, arrives on scene two hours after the initial attack. Abdullah, who is suffering from blurred vision, a splitting headache and lethargy -- common side-effects of exposure to nerve gas -- says the scene is chaotic. He tells CNN that that people were not initially aware of the presence of a toxic agent. Some who rushed to help are overwhelmed by the gas, including several members of the Syrian Civil Defense (SCD), or White Helmets, who have to be rescued by others from the group. Abdullah says around 30 wounded people have gone to Turkey for treatment. Hospitals targeted in follow-up airstrikes, activists say The makeshift clinic and Al-Rahma hospital, where the injured are being triaged, are targeted in new airstrikes four hours after the chemical attack, Idlib's health directorate and the SCD say in a joint press release. Videos emerge on social media Videos, which appear to be from the scene, are posted quickly to social media platforms. Mohammed Hardan, who works for AMC, says he was at al-Rahma hospital when it was targeted by aerial bombardment, posting footage of the incident hours later. White Helmets: Residents targeted by poison gas Warning: This section contains graphic images of dead children. The White Helmets say at least 50 people, including women and children, have been killed by "poisonous gases." 70 dead, activists say AMC activists say the Syrian regime is behind the attack and says at least 70 people are dead. It adds that 45 bodies have been identified so far. Syrian army denies chemical attack On Tuesday evening, Syrian President Bashar al-Assad's military "categorically denies" using chemical weapons and blames "terrorist" groups for the carnage. But many in the international community blame the Assad regime for the outrage. WEDNESDAY: Turkey says it has evidence of chemical attack Recep Akdag, Turkey's Health Minister, tells Turkish media: ''We have findings that suggest there was a chemical attack. We are sending these findings to World Health Organization as well after documenting them. Humanity should not remain insensitive to this issue." Turkey's Health Ministry later says 29 victims are being treated at six hospitals, and that three victims have died after their arrival. Survivors recall the horror Survivors who made it to the Reyhanli Hospital on the Turkey-Syria border say they saw a plane drop chemical bombs. Mazin Yusif, 13, tells CNN that he found his grandfather slumped over in front of his house shortly after the strike and ran for help. "I got dizzy and then fainted in front of my grandfathers garage. I next found myself here in this hospital, naked in a bed," he adds. 31-year-old Ahmed Abdel Rahim was also caught up in the strike. "I was in my house," he tells CNN. "I had difficulty breathing, but I feel better now. But I did throw up after getting to the hospital. I don't know if my family is dead or alive. I don't know anything." CNN's Ben Wedeman, Kareem Khadder, Schams Elwazer, Elizabeth Roberts, Eyad Kourdi, Tamara Qiblawi, Angela Dewan, Eliza Mackintosh and Euan McKirdy contributed to this report. 
1491413546	http://money.cnn.com/2017/04/05/media/pepsi-pulls-kendall-jenner-ad/index.html	Pepsi pulls controversial Kendall Jenner ad - Apr. 5, 2017	Kendall Jenner's ad sparks controversy Pepsi has pulled its controversial Kendall Jenner ad. The soda company announced on Wednesday that it will remove the ad, which sparked an immediate online backlash. "Pepsi was trying to project a global message of unity, peace and understanding. Clearly, we missed the mark, and we apologize," the company said in a statement. "We did not intend to make light of any serious issue. We are pulling the content and halting any further roll out." Pepsi also apologized to Jenner herself for putting her in this position. The ad, in which Jenner participates in a photo shoot before joining a group of protesters and offering a stoic police officer a Pepsi, was accused of appropriating the Black Lives Matter movement and using social justice to sell soda. CNNMoney (New York) First published April 5, 2017: 1:32 PM ET
1491413426	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/04/opinions/bill-oreilly-settlements-drexler/index.html	Bill O'Reilly is on the losing end of history (Opinion) - CNN.com	Peggy Drexler is the author of "Our Fathers, Ourselves: Daughters, Fathers, and the Changing American Family" and "Raising Boys Without Men." She is an assistant professor of psychology at Weill Medical College of Cornell University and a former gender scholar at Stanford University. The opinions expressed in this commentary are hers. (CNN)To many women, the most recent news about Fox powerhouse host Bill O'Reilly may seem like an awful Groundhog Day: another day, another powerful white man accused of a longtime pattern of mistreatment of women in the workplace -- apparently aided and abetted, no less surprisingly, by that workplace itself. Nothing changes, right? Not necessarily. After a New York Times investigation revealed Saturday that five women made allegations of sexual harassment or inappropriate behavior against O'Reilly over a number of years, something did happen, and it may begin to set things right. And it should not only give women hope that change is afoot but also put men who enter companies expecting the warm embrace of "bro-culture" and the "perks" that entails on notice: There's increasingly a price to be paid for the mistreatment of women. In the case of O'Reilly, the women -- all of whom either worked for him or appeared on his show -- told the same story: that O'Reilly would offer advice and promise to help then professionally, then pursue relationships with them. If they rebuffed him, they were punished, they said. In some cases, out of fear, they did not rebuff. But they did come forward -- just not publicly. In exchange for agreeing not to press charges or talk about their allegations, the five received settlements totaling about $13 million. These settlements, it appears, were made mainly by 21st Century Fox, the parent company of Fox News. O'Reilly denies the claims have merit -- but not that the payouts were made. It's news that's both surprising and, unfortunately, not. On one hand, Fox is still reeling from the ouster last year of its former chairman, Roger Ailes, amid his own scandal of sexual harassment. At the time, a statement issued by the company said it did not tolerate behavior that "disrespects women or contributes to an uncomfortable work environment." And yet, the Times reported, the network was well aware of the allegations against O'Reilly when it recently renewed his contract, reportedly for $18 million. It would at first seem cause for despair: How can anything be expected to change for women in the workplace, and the world, when the wrongs committed against them are so widespread -- and so often covered up, to be made not to matter, and left to persist, often even by the very people who claim to object? It's true. But it's important to remember that change takes time, and that stories such as this aren't steps backward but, in fact, forward. Although it may be disheartening to hear about the alleged actions of O'Reilly, and of his bosses, consider how long it took to expose and eject Ailes (who denies wrongdoing, even as his company paid $20 million to settle Gretchen Carlson's claim he harassed her) and how very pervasive his behavior reportedly was. (He is, in fact, even facing brand new harassment allegations -- which he denies.) Is it any wonder that the same attitude toward the treatment of women was reportedly practiced by others under his charge? Yet this is changing. And the more we hear about, and make of, the mistreatment of women in the workplace and anywhere, the more women are likely to band together to hasten that change. It starts with realizing there is strength in numbers, that speaking up -- and in many cases demanding compensation -- is crucial. As Wendy Walsh, one woman now accusing O'Reilly, said in a press conference, "What she (New York Times reporter Emily Steel) told me off the record were a lot of stories of women under gag orders who couldn't talk. My story was so mild that I thought I had to come forward and be the voice for them." The message to women: By telling your story, you can help others to tell theirs -- and perhaps protect others from similar mistreatment. The problem is, of course, that big money also talks. O'Reilly is the network's most profitable personality, with a show that just enjoyed its highest-rated quarter in history, attracting about 4 million viewers a night. From 2014 to 2016, it generated more than $446 million in ad revenue, according to the Times. You can see why Fox would be inclined to protect its asset. Meanwhile, it's not difficult to understand why a woman would take a secret payout rather than go through the process of a public, possibly humiliating, career-ending legal battle. But increasingly, men such as O'Reilly may not be able to count on women to accept money to "make it go away." The headlines attest to that. And that's why it means so much that already O'Reilly's show has lost three major car advertisers -- Mercedes-Benz, Hyundai and BMW -- as well as ads from a growing list of other companies (seven more as of this writing) in response to the allegations and settlements. Hopefully more will follow, and companies will show they mean business by staying away, even after the story dies down. Beyond this, to make the response to mistreatment of women really meaningful, companies, such as Fox, should consider putting offenders on the financial hook for allegations of harassment if they're otherwise "too valuable" to terminate. O'Reilly apparently personally settled one complaint in 2011, but if he had been held fully accountable, even monetarily, for the settlements would so many allegations have followed? In the meantime, companies' limp censure of powerful men -- particularly when it's exposed (by a female journalist) in such a thorough and seemingly incontrovertible way -- has a kind of upside. It will be the provocation women need to come forward and to understand that change is in their hands, and their hands only.  
1491414898	http://money.cnn.com/2017/04/04/media/list-oreilly-factor-advertisers-responses/index.html	Read what Bill O'Reilly's sponsors are saying about 'disturbing allegations' of harassment - Apr. 4, 2017	O'Reilly accuser: I'm not after money Fox News' "The O'Reilly Factor" is facing a rapidly growing exodus of advertisers in the wake of a New York Times report that five different women had reached settlements over allegations of sexual harassment or verbal abuse against the show's host, Bill O'Reilly. CNNMoney has reached out to dozens of the companies that have run ads on the program. Below is a list of the responses we've received so far, as well as some responses that companies have put on their Twitter accounts after users of that site asked them about their ads. Companies pulling their ads from "The O'Reilly Factor" Mercedes-Benz: "Yes, we had advertising running on The O'Reilly Factor (we run on most major cable news shows) and it has been reassigned in the midst of this controversy. The allegations are disturbing and, given the importance of women in every aspect of our business, we don't feel this is a good environment in which to advertise our products right now." Hyundai: "Hyundai currently has no advertising on The O'Reilly Factor. We had upcoming advertising spots on the show but are reallocating them due to the recent and disturbing allegations. As a company we seek to partner with companies and programming that share our values of inclusion and diversity. We will continue to monitor and evaluate the situation as we plan future advertising decisions." BMW of North America: "In light of the recent New York Times investigation, BMW of North America has suspended its advertising with 'The O'Reilly Factor.'" Mitsubishi: "Mitsubishi Motors takes these allegations very seriously and we have decided that we will pull our advertising at the present time. We will continue to monitor this situation as we assess our long-term strategy." Lexus: "We take our duties as a responsible advertiser seriously and have been closely monitoring the situation involving 'The O'Reilly Factor.' In response, we have asked our media-buying partners to move all Lexus ad inventory out of the program." Ainsworth Pet Nutrition: "We removed our advertising from the program because of these recent and disturbing allegations." Constant Contact: "Based on the recent allegations and our strong commitment to inclusion, respect and tolerance in the workplace, we have decided to pull Constant Contact's ads from The O'Reilly Factor." Credit Karma: "In light of the recent concerning allegations, we will not be advertising on this show and have asked for our ads to be removed." Bayer: "Bayer supports a safe, respectful and non-abusive environment for women and we have reached out to Fox to voice our concerns regarding this matter. Based on the serious nature of these allegations, we have made the decision to suspend all advertising on the program in question. This suspension has been requested immediately and will be handled as expeditiously as possible. We have been informed, however, that programming changes may not become effective immediately. It is important to note that Bayer purchases packages of advertising time across all major networks without selecting placement on any specific program. We regularly evaluate our advertising purchases to make sound judgments to continue or discontinue based upon our beliefs, values and ethical considerations." TrueCar: "Pending further assessment of recent developments, we have instructed our media buyer to direct our advertising to other programming." GlaxoSmithKline: "We are continually reviewing our advertising to ensure it is conducted in a responsible manner aligned with our values. We have temporarily put a hold on spots running on The O'Reilly Factor while we assess this situation." Sanofi: "At Sanofi Consumer Healthcare, decisions about advertising on any given website, network, magazine, or programs are never undertaken as an endorsement or non-endorsement of the host, editorial or entertainment content. Rather, our purpose in advertising our product is to provide important information to consumers so that they may make an informed decision about which product will best provide relief for their symptoms. The controversy around The O'Reilly Factor program and allegations made against Bill O'Reilly are matters that we take seriously and will continue to monitor. We do not endorse the behavior or opinions of program hosts or the content. We have reallocated our current advertising originally scheduled during this program. We will continue to monitor and evaluate the situation as we plan future advertising decisions." UNTUCKit: "As a company in which more than 2/3rd of our employees are women, we take sexual harassment claims very seriously. Moreover, it is important our corporate partners reflect the same principles of inclusivity and equality upon which we have built our brand. In light of the disturbing allegations, we instructed our media buyer this morning to reallocate our ad dollars to other shows effective immediately. We will continue to closely monitor the situation but believe this is the right decision at this time." Allstate: "Inclusivity and support for women are important Allstate values. We are concerned about the issues surrounding the program and we have suspended our advertising." Esurance: "In light of the recent controversies surrounding Bill O'Reilly and his treatment of women, Esurance is suspending its advertising during "The O'Reilly Factor." At Esurance, inclusion and support for women extends across all aspects of our business — from our associates to our customers to our partners. And we want to partner with organizations and programming that share those same values." T. Rowe Price: "We regularly evaluate our media buys to ensure alignment with our corporate values, and in light of the recent allegations we have decided to pull our upcoming ads from The O'Reilly Factor." Wayfair: "We do not have any future ad buys planned for the show at this time. We condemn all forms of harassment and are closely assessing the situation. We have advertised on the show in the past and in light of the reports have moved our spots to other programming while we assess the situation." Orkin: "Orkin buys its advertising in broad dayparts on networks that reach our target audience. We do not buy specific shows, including the O'Reilly Factor. The O'Reilly Factor is in the daypart that we buy on Fox, and we have added that show to our "Do Not Buy" list in the wake of the current allegations." Society for Human Resource Management: "SHRM has determined to cease its current advertising on the Fox News Network." The Wonderful Company: "At The Wonderful Company, we are committed to a respectful and inclusive workplace enviornment and insist upon the same from our business partners. We do not currently have or plan for ad inventory on this show." Coldwell Banker: "We were disappointed that our ad ran on O'Reilly as it wasn't part of our intentional media programming. We pulled future ads from the show." H&R Block: "We share your concern about recent allegations, and no longer advertise during The O'Reilly Factor as a result." Weather Tech: "We are already working on adjusting our advertising schedule and we appreciate your feedback." Advil: "We are no longer advertising on the Bill O'Reilly show." BambooHR: "BambooHR condemns workplace harassment, and in light of recent allegations, has canceled ads on The O'Reilly Factor." Jenny Craig: "As an organization, Jenny Craig condemns any and all forms of sexual harassment. As a matter of corporate policy, we do not publicly comment on our advertising strategy. We are constantly evaluating our media buys to maximize the efficiency of our corporate investment and effectively reach our target audience. However, we can confirm that we have suspended all ads on The O'Reilly Factor." Ancestry: "Equality and respect are core values for Ancestry, especially in the workplace. We will not support those whose actions conflict with those values. To be clear, we have pulled our ads from Bill O'Reilly." Subaru: "After review, we will no longer advertise during the Bill O'Reilly show in the future." Old Dominion Freight Line: "In light of the recent allegations surrounding the Bill O'Reilly show, OD has decided to discontinue our commercials from the show." Amica Insurance: "Our ads on The O'Reilly Factor are being pulled. It may take a few days for this to occur." LegalZoom: "This was not part of our intentional media programming and we have pulled all ads from this show." Companies currently evaluating whether or not to keep advertising on "The O'Reilly Factor" Trivago: "We are constantly reviewing our media buys to ensure we do not support any behavior that contradicts trivago's corporate values. We are currently reviewing the information available, but do not discuss our advertising strategy publicly." Enterprise Holdings: "We are looking into this, but we haven't made any decisions." TD Ameritrade: "We don't have a direct media buy with the program, and we have only run advertising on the show once in the last quarter. We have no plans to run anything else, at a minimum, until much later in the spring. Harassment in any form is unacceptable, and because one of our core values is People Matter, this is a situation that we are monitoring closely. If we need to make additional changes to our media buying strategy down the road, we have the flexibility to do so." Expedia: "We regularly evaluate all of our media buying, as we are doing now with regard to this program." Companies that will continue to advertise on "The O'Reilly Factor" Angie's List: "The advertising strategy we have long used at Angie's List is meant to reach as many people as possible with news that our service exists and is available to them. We place ads across a wide spectrum of venues intending to reach as many viewers/listeners/ readers as possible without taking a position on the viewpoints of the venues themselves. Just as we trust members to make their own hiring decisions, we trust them to make their own media consumption decisions." Companies that have ceased advertising on "The O'Reilly Factor" for other reasons CFP Board: "CFP Board does not have a partnership or a sponsorship with Fox News. Our television advertising is purchased through an advertising network where the advertisements are placed on multiple cable television channels and shows. As our spring flight is winding down, we will no longer have any placements on Fox News." Companies that aren't saying Quincy Bioscience: "We don't publicly comment on our advertising. As a company we condemn all forms of sexual harassment." CNNMoney (New York) First published April 4, 2017: 1:29 PM ET
1491414780	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/05/politics/steve-bannon-national-security-council/index.html	What Steve Bannon's demotion tells us about the Trump White House - CNNPolitics.com	Washington (CNN)President Trump's decision to remove chief strategist Steve Bannon from the National Security Council's principals committee suggests a potentially significant change in the power balance among the four top White House advisers. Bannon's placement on the principals committee at the start of the Trump administration drew criticism not only from Democrats but also from many Republicans and prominent members of the intelligence community. The idea that Bannon, who, prior to his hiring as the chief political strategist to Trump's campaign, had been the CEO of a conservative news website, would sit on a committee typically reserved only for the upper echelon of the military, raised questions about the scope of his influence within the White House. It was part of a broader ascension of Bannon within the West Wing; he was widely regarded in the early days of the administration as a first among equals in a group that included chief of staff Reince Priebus, counselor Kellyanne Conway and son-in-law Jared Kushner. That ascension has clearly faltered. The removal of Bannon from the NSC comes in the wake of a series of other moves -- most notably the arrival of Trump's daughter, Ivanka, in the West Wing -- that suggest that the president is moving away (at least for the moment) from the more hard-line ideological bent of Bannon. "I always believed Steve would be first senior adviser to leave the White House," said one former Trump aide granted anonymity to speak candidly. "He's an ideologue. Trump is not. He has to get frustrated." The Trump White House sought to spin the Bannon decision not as a demotion but rather a natural conclusion to his initial appointment to the principals committee. But, that doesn't really check out. If Bannon's position on the NSC was always meant to be temporary why not say that from the outset? It's hard not to see the Bannon move in the broader context of Trump's first 75 days in office, which have been, to put it mildly, chaotic. The attempt to overhaul the Affordable Care Act ended before it ever started, an 18-day debacle that showed that Trump's challenges within his own party were far larger than he seemed to believe. He continues to labor under a self-inflicted controversy regarding his unproven allegation that President Obama wiretapped him during the 2016 campaign. The numerous ties between senior campaign aides and Russian intelligence officials -- as well as the ongoing Justice Department investigation into these ties -- show no signs of being knocked off front pages. All of it has created a toxic political environment for Trump. His approval rating in Gallup's daily tracking poll is mired in the mid 30s; it's at 37% in the three-day rolling average today. That marks a historic low for a president so new to the office. The lowest approval number Gallup measured for Obama in his first year was 49% in November 2009. For George W. Bush it was 51% in September 2001. W hile Trump -- like all politicians -- is loathe to admit a change of direction is needed or that mistakes have been made, it's hard to look at his current position and conclude anything else. To be clear: Bannon will remain in the White House -- and in a senior role. But the diminution of his power -- and in such a public way -- is a clear sign that a shakeup in the Trump power structure is under way. Trump, of course, is mercurial. Bannon may have fallen out of favor -- for now. But, almost nothing is set in stone in the world of Donald Trump so in a month or two we could be talking about Bannon's reassertion of primacy in the Trump orbit. But, that's not the story today.  
1491414593	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/05/vr/iran-khomeini-shrine-islam-vr/index.html	See one of Iran's most popular toursit destinations - CNN.com	The Khomeini Shrine is the burial site of the Imam Ruhollah Khomeini, leader of Iran's 1979 Islamic Revolution. Worshipers flock here to pay their respects and to see the beautiful architecture.  
1491414573	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/05/politics/trump-susan-rice-committed-crime/index.html	Offering no evidence, Trump suggests Susan Rice unmasking requests may be criminal - CNNPolitics.com	Washington (CNN)President Donald Trump said former White House National Security Adviser Susan Rice may have committed a crime when requesting to unmask the names of Trump's associates who were incidentally mentioned on intercepted communications during the Obama administration. Speaking to The New York Times Wednesday, Trump said, "I think it's going to be the biggest story." He continued,"It's such an important story for our country and the world. It is one of the big stories of our time." Trump, asked by the Times, if he believed Rice committed a crime, responded, "Do I think? Yes, I think." Trump offered no evidence to back his allegations or any names of other Obama administration officials he said were also involved. He did not suggest that his assertions came from new intelligence reports but said he would explain himself further "at the right time." Trump did not repeat his claim at a White House news conference shortly after the Times interview.  
1491414523	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/05/opinions/global-gag-rule-life-death-opinion-kuo/index.html	Global Gag Rule: The result is life or death (opinion) - CNN.com	Caroline Kuo is the inaugural Dean of Diversity and Inclusion at Brown University School of Public Health and a professor in the Department of Behavioral and Social Sciences. She is a fellow with the Public Voices Greenhouse through The OpEd Project. The views expressed in this commentary are her own. (CNN)Thandiwe, whose name has been changed to protect her identity, wakes up every morning at 6 a.m. to iron her school uniform in a township on the outskirts of Cape Town, South Africa. She times her walk to make it as quickly and safely as possible over the main artery of the township, through narrow alleyways and into her middle school. Walking alone, Thandiwe is necessarily wary. South Africa has some of the highest rates of rape and sexual assault in the world. Over a quarter of South African men reported they perpetrated rape, with 1 in 20 men reporting rape of a child under 15, according to a survey by Dr. Rachel Jewkes at the South African Medical Research Council. South Africa also has the largest HIV epidemic in the world. If a girl or young woman is raped, it is possible to prevent her from getting HIV. However, she must get life-saving medication as soon as possible, and ideally within 72 hours of an assault from a clinic that is accessible and close by. These are the clinics and services that face closure under the Mexico City Policy, which prohibits funding to nongovernmental organizations offering information, referrals and services for abortion as part of comprehensive sexual and reproductive health education. President Donald Trump signed an executive memorandum to reinstate the policy earlier this year, restricting how foreign nongovernmental organizations spend their money for a full spectrum of life-saving reproductive health services if they receive any amount of money from the US government. And, on Monday, the US State Department notified the Senate Foreign Relations Committee that US funding for the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) would be withdrawn on the grounds that UNFPA supports coercive abortion or involuntary sterilization. UNFPA responded in a statement clearly refuting this assertion with details of its lifesaving work in over 150 countries and territories. Defunding UNFPA is just the latest Trump administration policy decision, of several, that undermines the health and safety of girls across the globe. Advocates of these Trump administration policies describe them as anti-abortion policies. Opponents argue these policies takes away knowledge and access to safe abortions as a choice for girls, women and families. Since its initiation in 1984, various presidential administrations have rescinded and reinstated the Mexico City Policy. A study by Dr. Eran Bendavid at Stanford University School of Medicine shows the policy never worked as intended. After analyzing abortion rates in African countries over 14 years, whenever the Mexico City Policy was restored, Bendavid's team found women were two and a half times more likely to get abortions in African countries implementing the policy compared to countries where the policy was not applied. This evidence indicates the Mexico City Policy was detrimental to nongovernmental organizations providing modern contraceptives, inadvertently leading to more, rather than fewer abortions. This failed policy was -- and continues to be -- a danger to the reproductive health of girls and women. What is even more dangerous now is the expansion of the policy under the current executive memorandum. In this iteration, the reinstated policy is being expanded from family planning to restrict spending for any organization that accepts US government global health funding. Organizations newly captured under this expansion include those involved in life-saving HIV and AIDS prevention, treatment and response (along with delivery of other critical health programs such as childhood vaccinations, nutrition, malaria and more) -- the kind young girls like Thandiwe rely on. This reinstated policy also expands restrictions so that organizations cannot spend other streams of funding on these essential programs if they accept any amount of US government funding, and choose to provide comprehensive sexual and reproductive health information, referrals, and services. The US government spends $6.6 billion annually to address the global HIV epidemic. This includes the President's Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief, better known as PEPFAR. Last year, PEPFAR provided lifesaving HIV treatment to 11.5 million children, women, and men; cared and supported 6.2 million orphans and vulnerable children; prevented 2 million babies from being born with HIV; and reached 1 million girls and young women with innovative prevention programs. Reinstating this policy now puts these lives at stake in addition to the reproductive health of girls and young women. More than 7,000 miles from the US in the streets of South Africa, there is a palatable sense of fear for people's lives with the pending full-scale implementation of this American policy decision. The impact of this American policy decision will be felt most in girls' and women's bodies, families affected by HIV, and in community organizations and hospital wards where activists, leaders, doctors, nurses and social workers work to stem the tide of the HIV and AIDS epidemic. The signed executive memorandum has not made it into the Federal Register. That is the "how-to" manual that breathes policies to life through action steps implemented in all federal bureaucracies affected by the order. The time to act is now. American citizens can still intervene to negate policies detrimental to girls and women worldwide. Do so by publicly voicing dissent to overturn this misguided executive memorandum. Do so by communicating your desire for action by federal representatives who control important aspects of implementation that can limit policy damage. And for all global citizens, do so by contributing your energy, time and funds to supporting the life-saving work of organizations that may disappear because of this policy. The Mexico City Policy has been reversed three times in 32 years. It is time to do so again.  
1491415370	http://money.cnn.com/2017/04/05/media/donald-trump-defends-bill-oreilly/index.html	Trump defends Bill O'Reilly: 'I don't think Bill did anything wrong' - Apr. 5, 2017	Lisa Bloom wants Fox News investigated President Donald Trump on Wednesday weighed in on the recent controversy surrounding Fox News host Bill O'Reilly. In an interview with The New York Times, Trump defended O'Reilly against new revelations that he, Fox News and parent company 21st Century Fox had paid a total of $13 million in settlements to five women who accused him of sexual harassment or verbal abuse. "I think he's a person I know well — he is a good person," Trump told the Times. "I think he shouldn't have settled; personally I think he shouldn't have settled. Because you should have taken it all the way. I don't think Bill did anything wrong." O'Reilly has denied the merits of all the claims against him, 21st Century Fox said in a statement. Trump had his own run-in with sexual harassment accusations last October, after an Access Hollywood tape surfaced in which he said he grabbed women by their genitals. "I don't even wait," Trump can be heard saying in the tape. "And when you're a star, they let you do it, you can do anything." Last week, Trump declared April 2017 National Sexual Assault Awareness and Prevention Month, pledging that his administration "will do everything in its power to protect women, children, and men from sexual violence." Trump's defense of O'Reilly was similar to his defense of former Fox News chief Roger Ailes last year, when Ailes was facing a litany of sexual harassment allegations. "I think they are unfounded just based on what I've read," Trump said of the accusations against Ailes. "Totally unfounded, based on what I read." Ailes, who has denied all of the allegations against him, was forced to resign from Fox News just one week after that interview. Related: Companies pull ads from 'The O'Reilly Factor' in growing backlash Nine months after Ailes' departure, Fox News is facing mounting public pressure from accusers, advertisers and women's rights groups to go further in addressing the allegations against O'Reilly. More than 20 companies had pulled their advertising from "The O'Reilly Factor" as of Wednesday. Lisa Bloom, the lawyer for one of O'Reilly's accusers, has called for an independent investigation of Fox News. The National Organization for Women has called for him to be fired. Meanwhile, many female employees inside Fox News are too scared to speak out about problems in the workplace, fearing that they have no leverage against powerful on-air talents like O'Reilly, current and former network sources have told CNNMoney. Related: At Fox News, fear and silence amid O'Reilly controversy 21st Century Fox and Fox News are standing behind O'Reilly. But neither the company nor O'Reilly have addressed the matter since Saturday, when the New York Times first revealed the extent of settlements paid to O'Reilly's accusers. Henry Holt, the publisher of O'Reilly's new book "Old School," has said it has "no comment at this time" on the allegations against its author. 21st Century Fox is also under federal investigation over its handling of payments made to women who accused Ailes of sexual harassment. CNNMoney (New York) First published April 5, 2017: 1:03 PM ET
1491415001	http://www.cnn.com/2017/03/07/middleeast/return-to-mosul-arwa-damon-mattar/index.html	Return to hell: Finding Mosul family who sheltered us - CNN.com	Watch CNN Special Report "Return to Mosul" with international correspondent Arwa Damon on Saturday at 9 p.m. ET. East Mosul, Iraq (CNN)The last time I saw Mattar, she was running for her life, and she was angry. Angry at the ISIS fighters shooting outside, angry at the soldiers hiding in her home, angry at her family's misfortune, to live in Iraq at a time like this. And angry with me, for repeatedly telling her that back up units were on their way, though none had arrived. Photojournalist Brice Lainé and I had embedded with a unit of Iraqi counter-terrorism troops as they pushed to take streets from ISIS in eastern Mosul. But things had gone badly wrong. Trapped in its maze of narrow, muddy side roads, our convoy was pinned down, our escape route blocked. After our armored vehicle took a direct hit we dashed from house to house to get away from the encroaching ISIS fighters, eventually ending up in Mattar's home. There, the family, soldiers and journalists spent one of the most terrifying nights of our lives as explosions rocked the building and a deadly firefight raged outside. Yet the family had fed us and the soldiers, made us tea, offered us blankets, and all the while Mattar had kept her sense of humor and her dignity. Return to Mosul: Hell and humanity in ISIS' shadow Just seven years my senior, Mattar had become my "Mosul mom" in those hours, though she'd joked how unfair it was that I looked so much younger, and had not gone gray. "Look! This is what being Iraqi does to you," she said, showing me the roots of her hair. Then, at dawn, when the firefight erupted again, worse than ever, and an airstrike on the house next door had her family screaming in fear under the stairs, they had fled in panic, barefoot and without looking back, amid a hail of bullets and grenades. I had not even had a chance to hug her goodbye, to say thank you. We eventually escaped, went home, enjoyed the luxury of feeling safe, but what had happened to them? For two months, Brice and I had worried about the soldiers who were with us that day, about the civilians who sheltered us, about Mattar and her family. We had to go back and find out. 28 hours in Mosul: Leading the attack, then trapped Searching for old friends We are disoriented at first, we can't get our bearings. Our memories are of vehicles exploding in a ball of flames, of the burned-out wrecks of others, of mad dashes to safety. Is this the place? We think we recognize the street, and then the street recognizes us: A man in whose brother's house we briefly sought refuge in comes over to say hello. The man, Nawfal, had been so kind, frying eggs for us and the troops as his terrified wife Farah and frightened children cowered in a void behind a flimsy wooden cupboard. Farah's hands are shaking again as she grabs mine in greeting. The trauma of this city is beyond comprehension. Walking onward, up the road towards Mattar's place, we are anxious, uneasy, hoping they are there, but afraid of what we might find out. I can't remember what the house looked like from the outside, can't work out which one it is, until I spot a familiar -- but changed -- face: it's Mattar's husband, Abu Abdullah, without his big gray beard. As we gossiped together to pass the time that night months ago, Mattar had giggled that she thought her husband was better looking clean shaven, and how much she was looking forward to the day ISIS was gone, so he could cut off his beard. "You promised you would come back," he says. "You are a good girl." Rescuing Arwa and Brice: My toughest 24 hours I take a deep breath and ask the question we've been dreading hearing the answer to: "Is everyone all right? We heard someone had died." "No," he assures us, grinning, "Everyone is OK." Then all of a sudden, Mattar is there. She barrels into me, crushing my ribs with a hearty "big momma" hug and covering my face with kisses. "Ayy! I ran to see you," she says, pulling me to the ground and sobbing. "You came back!" She's tired, she says. It's been a difficult few months, and they haven't long been back. After they ran out of the house, she tells me, they were stopped by armed ISIS fighters and themselves had to seek shelter in another relative's house. Eventually they escaped and made it to Gogjali, a town on the outskirts of Mosul which had already been liberated. They stayed there a month. "We still didn't have our shoes," they say. Now things are looking up; they are home and there's a new baby in the family. "You're not mad?" I ask, worried. No, Mattar insists, she's not angry, she doesn't hate us. As if to prove it, she shares wonderful but very unexpected news. "I named my granddaughter after you, because I love you." I'm lost for words, enveloped in a bubble of happiness and relief. The kindness of Iraqis, despite everything they have been through, always stuns me. Return to Mosul: Hell and humanity in ISIS' shadow Orphaned by an airstrike But if the story of Iraq is one of survival of the human spirit, it is also one of deep suffocating sorrow, and moments later, my joy evaporates as Mattar's neighbour arrives. "You filmed my son getting shot," he says. Abu Yassin's son was mistaken for a fighter and killed as he stood on the roof of the family's home. Brice captured the piercing wail of a woman ringing out as his son's death was discovered. And he was not the only civilian killed that day in this war that has no real front lines, no rules. The airstrike that hit the house next door while we were here killed eight civilians, Abu Yassin says. Only three survived: two teenagers and a little boy, orphaned in the raid. A relative who's now caring for the little boy says he hasn't been able to tell him that his parents and sisters are dead. His voice shakes with emotion as we talk on the phone. But he wants to make one thing clear -- he forgives the person who hit the house, saving his anger for ISIS. "I know that if the pilot, no matter where he is from or his religion, knew that there were two families in the house they would not have taken the strike, or they would have used a smaller rocket," he says. Eleven people were sheltering in the house -- under the stairs, just like Mattar's children next door -- when a group of ISIS fighters jumped the wall, the man says. The militants climbed up to the roof, tossed a grenade into the yard, and were getting ready to attack the house where we were when the airstrike killed them -- and their hostages, who were being held at gunpoint. These two families lived just 20 feet apart; one survived, one was destroyed. Iraqis know war. They know the pain of loss. They have lived it for decades. But there is precious little room for joy here, just all-too-fleeting moments of happiness. Taking western Mosul from ISIS: 5 key questions Family fled barefoot, in panic Iraq is a nation known for its tribal ways, its brutality. But it is also a nation whose people are kind and caring -- to friends, family, and even complete strangers. Mattar's living room that day became both sleeping quarters and makeshift clinic, as wounded soldiers were brought in, and the family shared their meager meals with all of us, keen to maintain the Iraqi hospitality that somehow endures through the worst situations. She and I spent hours together, talking, laughing and telling stories, in between my trips to the roof to message Hamdi, our field producer and lifeline, who was desperately trying to get us out of there. Mattar and her family had every right to resent us, for blundering into their home with a video camera and soldiers and filming them. But they have that kindness and purity that is intrinsic to Iraqis -- though it's a part that outsiders, too used to footage of war and destruction, never see. There was humor too. As night fell, she had even joked, "come, I will cradle you to sleep," before adding, eyes twinkling, "but I am too fat! I might roll on you and squish you!" Then the following morning, after a fraught, restless night, Mattar's jovial exterior finally cracked, exposing the cold, gut-wrenching terror beneath. This woman, who just hours earlier had ducked her head, too shy to show the Iraqi soldiers her face, now ran out into the courtyard to shout at them, plead with them, to help her, to save her family. They tried to reassure her, but it was no use; even though we could hear suicide car bombs and grenades going off outside, she became convinced the family had to try to escape. "We aren't going to survive," she had wailed in panic. "We need to get out of here. Even if three or four of us die, the rest will survive." And then, suddenly, they were gone. So this is what it looks like when someone "flees with just the clothes on their back," I thought. I've used the phrase so many times on air. Now I truly understood it. Return to Mosul: Hell and humanity in ISIS' shadow Looking to the future But unlike so many of the stories to come out of Iraq in recent years, Mattar's has a hopeful ending -- for now at least, though the shadow of ISIS still hangs over their home In western Mosul there's a fierce battle being fought against ISIS, but here in the city's east, life is coming back though risks remain: people are returning to their homes, shops and markets are reopening, and children are finally able to go back to school, to try and recover from the horrors they have witnessed. We last saw Mattar's son Ahmed, 10, crouching beneath the stairs, screaming in fear as soldiers shot through the kitchen window at ISIS fighters outside. "I am still little," he says, "I was scared; I didn't want to die." Now he can look to future. "I want to be a doctor," he tells us. Arwa Damon: Why I'll always go back to Iraq Days after our first reunion, we're back at Mattar's house for one last visit before we leave Iraq, and -- after making sure I've washed my hands, placing the soap between my palms and turning the faucet on for me, as though I were her child -- she smiles. "Come, come," she says. "There's someone I want you to meet." It's my namesake, baby Arwa. I'm touched at the huge honor this beautiful family has bestowed on me. She is sleeping peacefully, oblivious to the danger all around her. "Take her," Mattar says, only half joking, as she gently lays the dozing newborn in my arms. "Take her to America." But little Arwa's place is here, in Iraq, in Mosul. Perhaps by the time she's old enough to remember, the war will be over. This story was reported by Arwa Damon, Brice Lainé, Hamdi Alkhshali and Muwafak Mohammed in Mosul, Iraq. It was edited and produced by Bryony Jones in London. Tim Lister contributed to the story. 
1491416114	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/05/politics/trump-syria-comments-response/index.html	Trump: 'I now have responsibility' when it comes to Syria - CNNPolitics.com	Washington (CNN)President Donald Trump, speaking at a news conference on Wednesday, said the chemical attack against Syrian civilians "crossed a lot of lines for me" and changed the way he views Syria and leader Bashar al-Assad. "I now have responsibility, and I will have that responsibility and carry it very proudly," Trump said responding to a question about a White House statement Tuesday that blamed the attack in part on President Barack Obama. "It is now my responsibility. It was a great opportunity missed," Trump said. Trump did maintain that Obama's failure to respond to his red line threat "was a blank threat (that) set us back a long ways, not only in Syria but in many other parts of the world." The President condemned the attack as "heinous." "Yesterday's chemical attack, a chemical attack that was so horrific in Syria against innocent people, including women, small children and even beautiful little babies, their deaths were an affront to humanity," Trump said from the Rose Garden. "These heinous actions by the Assad regime cannot be tolerated. The United States stands with our allies across the globe to condemn this horrific attack and all other horrific attacks, for that matter." World leaders expressed shock and outrage Tuesday at reports of the suspected targeted attack in northwestern Syria that killed scores of civilians, with one UK official suggesting the incident amounted to a war crime. Activists said the Syrian regime was responsible for killing dozens of people, including many children, leading the United Nations to replace a scheduled Security Council session for Wednesday morning with an emergency meeting. Syrian President Bashar al-Assad's military denied using chemical weapons and blamed rebels for the carnage. Russia, Syria's strong ally, said it had no warplanes in the vicinity. Earlier in the day, Trump had left the door open to new action in Syria in his first on-camera comments in response to a deadly suspected chemical attack in the Middle East. "You will see," Trump said when asked if he would take new action, according to pool reporters present when Trump welcomed Jordan's King Abdullah to the Oval Office. "These are very troubled times in the Middle East, and we see what happened just recently yesterday in Syria -- horrible. Horrible, horrible thing. Unspeakable," Trump said, later calling it a "terrible affront to humanity." CNN's Kareem Khadder, Schams Elwazer, Elizabeth Roberts, Eyad Kourdi and Tamara Qiblawi contributed to this report. 
1491415979	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/05/politics/fighter-jet-crash-maryland/index.html	US F-16 crashes near Joint Base Andrews - CNNPolitics.com	Washington (CNN)A US F-16 crashed several miles outside Joint Base Andrews in Maryland on Wednesday, two Air Force officials told CNN. The crash took place about six miles outside the base, which is located in Prince George's County, and occurred during a routine training mission, according to Air Force officials. The pilot ejected in "an unpopulated area" and "is OK," one of the officials said, adding that the F-16 was from the 113th Fighter Wing of the Air National Guard, which is assigned to Joint Base Andrews. He landed safely about one mile from the crash site and is being treated at a nearby hospital, according to Prince George's County Acting Fire Chief Benjamin Barksdale. Police said that there have been no reports of injuries to people on the ground or damage to nearby homes, as the jet crashed in a wooded area between two communities. The debris field is located just 200 yards from some of the homes. It is "very fortunate that no lives were lost today," Barksdale said during a press conference. Large portions of the aircraft, including a wing and the fuselage, were found intact after the crash, allowing investigators to identify it as an F-16, police said. Air Force Chief of Staff Gen. David Goldfein addressed the incident at a House Armed Services hearing Wednesday morning. "If you heard jet noises driving into the Capitol, it was likely the F-16s from the 113th Air National Guard Wing at Andrews," Goldfein said. "I learned just walking in this morning that we lost an F-16 from that wing this morning. I'm proud to say at least the news reports are telling us the pilot got out and he's OK." Lockheed Martin's F-16 Fighting Falcon is a multi-role aircraft, built to carry out a variety of missions. The US Air Force currently has just over 1,000 F-16s in its inventory. Known as the "Capital Guardians," the 113th Fighter Wing is charged with defending the nation's Capital and also provides fighter, airlift and support forces capable of local, national and global employment, according to the Air Force. CNN's Jeremy Herb contributed to this report. 
1491415600	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/05/golf/play-suspended-at-masters-par-3-contest/index.html	Masters 2017: Play suspended at Par 3 Contest - CNN.com	(CNN)The severe weather in the Southeast suspended play Wednesday at the Masters Par 3 Contest at Augusta National Golf Club in Augusta, Georgia. "The course will be closed for the remainder of the day," the Masters Twitter account says. The Par 3 Contest, which has been taking place since 1960, occurs the day before the start of the Masters Tournament. According to the Masters website, tournament participants, noncompeting past champions and honorary Invitees are invited to participate in the Par 3 Contest, which is held on a nine-hole course. No Par 3 Contest winner has followed that with a Masters Tournament victory that same week. The 81st edition of the Masters Tournament starts Thursday.  
1491416469	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/05/politics/steve-bannon-national-security-council/index.html	What Steve Bannon's demotion tells us about the Trump White House - CNNPolitics.com	Washington (CNN)President Trump's decision to remove chief strategist Steve Bannon from the National Security Council's principals committee suggests a potentially significant change in the power balance among the four top White House advisers. Bannon's placement on the principals committee at the start of the Trump administration drew criticism not only from Democrats but also from many Republicans and prominent members of the intelligence community. The idea that Bannon, who, prior to his hiring as the chief political strategist to Trump's campaign, had been the CEO of a conservative news website, would sit on a committee typically reserved only for the upper echelon of the military, raised questions about the scope of his influence within the White House. It was part of a broader ascension of Bannon within the West Wing; he was widely regarded in the early days of the administration as a first among equals in a group that included chief of staff Reince Priebus, counselor Kellyanne Conway and son-in-law Jared Kushner. That ascension has clearly faltered. The removal of Bannon from the NSC comes in the wake of a series of other moves -- most notably the arrival of Trump's daughter, Ivanka, in the West Wing -- that suggest that the president is moving away (at least for the moment) from the more hard-line ideological bent of Bannon. "I always believed Steve would be first senior adviser to leave the White House," said one former Trump aide granted anonymity to speak candidly. "He's an ideologue. Trump is not. He has to get frustrated." The Trump White House sought to spin the Bannon decision not as a demotion but rather a natural conclusion to his initial appointment to the principals committee. But, that doesn't really check out. If Bannon's position on the NSC was always meant to be temporary why not say that from the outset? It's hard not to see the Bannon move in the broader context of Trump's first 75 days in office, which have been, to put it mildly, chaotic. The attempt to overhaul the Affordable Care Act ended before it ever started, an 18-day debacle that showed that Trump's challenges within his own party were far larger than he seemed to believe. He continues to labor under a self-inflicted controversy regarding his unproven allegation that President Obama wiretapped him during the 2016 campaign. The numerous ties between senior campaign aides and Russian intelligence officials -- as well as the ongoing Justice Department investigation into these ties -- show no signs of being knocked off front pages. All of it has created a toxic political environment for Trump. His approval rating in Gallup's daily tracking poll is mired in the mid 30s; it's at 37% in the three-day rolling average today. That marks a historic low for a president so new to the office. The lowest approval number Gallup measured for Obama in his first year was 49% in November 2009. For George W. Bush it was 51% in September 2001. hile Trump -- like all politicians -- is loathe to admit a change of direction is needed or that mistakes have been made, it's hard to look at his current position and conclude anything else. To be clear: Bannon will remain in the White House -- and in a senior role. But the diminution of his power -- and in such a public way -- is a clear sign that a shakeup in the Trump power structure is under way. Trump, of course, is mercurial. Bannon may have fallen out of favor -- for now. But, almost nothing is set in stone in the world of Donald Trump so in a month or two we could be talking about Bannon's reassertion of primacy in the Trump orbit. But, that's not the story today.  
1491416385	http://money.cnn.com/2017/04/05/news/economy/cfbp-director-cordray-republicans/index.html	House Republican: President Trump please fire CFPB Director Richard Cordray - Apr. 5, 2017	What is the CFPB? A top House Republican beseeched President Trump to fire Richard Cordray, the head of the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, pronto. Jeb Hensarling, chairman of the House Financial Services Committee, called on the president to dismiss Cordray "immediately." "I believe the president is clearly justified in dismissing you and I call upon the president -- yet again - to do just that, and to do it immediately," said Hensarling during a hearing on Capitol Hill Wednesday. Powered by SmartAsset.com SMARTASSET.COM Republicans want the former Ohio attorney general to be ousted and replaced with someone who holds their own views. GOP lawmakers have a long list of steps to overhaul the agency, including turning the agency into a commission run by several people rather than one and handing over control of its budget to Congress. But the 2010 Dodd-Frank reform law that created the independent agency states the president can't fire the director without cause. Related: Barney Frank defends consumer agency from 'conservative assault' "Republicans have been clamoring to weaken, impede, and ultimately destroy the Consumer Bureau since its creation," said Maxine Waters, a top Democrat on the panel. She told Cordray she hopes the president "would have the wisdom to ask you to stay on" until his term expires in July 2018. Critics of the agency, which is in charge of protecting consumers from unfair, deceptive or abusive practices, point to a court case that questions the constitutionality of the bureau having a single director. The CFPB challenged the October ruling, which gives the president the authority to fire the director. The agency has been granted a rehearing in May. Related: Justice Department says Trump has power to fire bank regulator The Justice Department has also stepped in to back that decision. In March, the department filed a legal brief arguing that the Constitution grants the president "the authority to remove executive branch agency heads at will," unless the agency is headed by a commission. "There is a greater risk that an 'independent' agency headed by a single person will engage in extreme departures from the President's executive policy," the DOJ wrote. Throughout Wednesday's contentious hearing, GOP lawmakers repeatedly took the opportunity to disparage Cordray and the agency's work since its inception. Ann Wagner, head of the panel's oversight subcommittee, painted the CFPB as a latecomer in uncovering Wells Fargo's fraudulent sales practices. She repeatedly pressed Cordray to specify about when he prompted the agency's staff to begin its investigation of the San Francisco-based bank, suggesting the agency was "asleep at the wheel" until press reports emerged. Wells Fargo (WFC) employees secretly opened unauthorized accounts to hit sales targets and receive bonuses. Employees went so far as to create phony PIN numbers and fake email addresses to enroll customers in online banking services. The bank fired 5,300 employees over the last few years related to the shady behavior. Other GOP lawmakers, including Sean Duffy and Hensarling, also chastised Cordray for failing to reply to dozens of subpoena requests, including one tied to Ally Financial (ALLY) for discriminatory pricing in the lender's auto loans, and for not certifying compliance with lawmakers' requests. Related: Top Fed official likens Wells Fargo fraud to mortgage crisis "I believe we have complied with all your subpoena requests," Cordray told Duffy. Separately, Hensarling pressed Cordray on whether he was aware of the Federal Reserve's Inspector General review of the agency's handling of congressional inquiries. "I don't always know the inquiries that the IG is conducting," said Cordray. "I'm not supposed to know all the inquiries that IG is conducting." Democrats were quick to acknowledge the hostility from their colleagues from across the aisle. "Mr. Cordray, boy they really hate you, don't they?" said Michael Capuano, a Democratic lawmaker. He was joined by a chorus of other Democrats, who hailed Cordray's work as critical to protecting American consumers. CNNMoney (Washington) First published April 5, 2017: 12:53 PM ET
1491416383	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/04/travel/jessamyn-stanley-durham-nc-one-perfect-day/index.html	A local's guide to what's new and cool in Durham, NC - CNN.com	Durham, NC (CNN)Yoga teacher Jessamyn Stanley hasn't been seated more than a couple minutes at her favorite new restaurant, Palace International, when two women eating lunch nearby recognize her. "Oh, are you the one that does yoga?" asks the first woman, smiling nervously. "I follow you!" "Yes, hi," replies Stanley, squirming a little at the attention. The woman continues to praise Stanley, telling her that Stanley's Instagram posts have helped give larger women a positive body image. People recognize Stanley whenever she's home in Durham, North Carolina -- not just for her hardcore yoga classes, but because of her social media presence. Using her Instagram and YouTube accounts, she advocates yoga for everyone, busting through the yoga stereotype of the slim, white, heterosexual woman who can afford group classes and pretty props. A native of nearby Greensboro, Stanley was unhappily attending graduate school in Winston-Salem when she turned to yoga to find some relief. She had tried it before but this time, it took. Yoga gave her the courage to leave her program and move to Durham five years ago, with no job or friends to speak of. After she moved, she was reeling from the loss of a seven-year relationship and the death of her aunt, and yoga became her saving grace. And her first job at Mateo, Durham restaurateur Matt Kelly's highly-regarded downtown tapas restaurant, gave Stanley a front row seat to the redevelopment of the Bull City, so called after the Bull Durham Tobacco brand launched by the Blackwell Tobacco Company in the 1800s. From tobacco central to smaller makers Once home to a bustling tobacco industry and a four-block "Black Wall Street" area of African-American-owned financial enterprises, Durham had become a place in the late 1980s where the mostly white, middle classes from nearby Raleigh and Chapel Hill would not go after dark. Now the city is bustling with new hotels, farm-to-table restaurants, a busy and engaged farmers' market (even in winter), a food truck scene, ethically sourced coffee shops and storefronts selling locally made foods and home goods. Some of that is thanks to the health care and life sciences industries, Duke University and Counter Culture Coffee, which is headquartered in Durham and has a roasting facility, training center and Friday open tastings here. But much credit also goes to the hustle of independent artists and entrepreneurs, including Stanley and her friends, who moved into the city and made it their home. Getting priced out of the city Stanley loves is a possibility she and her friends debate endlessly, fighting for a city living wage and gender identity/LGBTQ protections, even as they recommend their favorite places for visitors to check out. Any newbie to the Bull City may want to pop into Duke Gardens, the new Durham Bulls baseball park, the American Tobacco Historic District, Dame's Chicken & Waffles and The Pit's Durham location -- pick your meat and sauce -- to get a sense of place. Stanley does occasionally eat at the Pit and do yoga at Duke Gardens, but some of her favorite spots are mostly known by the locals who live and breathe Durham. Before Stanley heads out on tour for her new book, "Every Body Yoga," which releases April 4, she took CNN to visit some of those spots around Durham on a rare day off. Wake up with sustainable coffee After waking up and doing some morning yoga, Stanley first heads to Cocoa Cinnamon, which is owned by husband-and-wife team Areli and Leon Barrera de Grodski. Cocoa Cinnamon's first location sits on a corner in Durham's Central Park neighborhood, filled with regulars drinking Counter Culture coffee and specialty drinks as they work at the collection of tables. The most popular is the Dr. Durham, says the barista, which consists of a latte with slightly frothier microfoam with homemade vanilla topped with maca root powder, ginger root powder and black lava salt. "Did you enjoy your trip?" Stanley asks Areli Barrera de Grodski, who's behind the counter today, as she orders her favorite Moctezuma, a latte with dulce de leche and cayenne pepper. "Yeah, I got to visit the southern part of Peru, went to Machu Picchu and realized that it's like all about astrology," Areli replies. The coffee shop, which started as a mobile bike (not a truck) and opened this storefront in 2013, now has two locations and is building a third. The couple have built their business on sourcing many of its ingredients locally and its coffee sustainably, and paying workers a living wage. Cocoa Cinnamon, 420 West Geer Street, Durham, NC, 27701 Buying locally, supporting friends Located around the corner from Cocoa Cinnamon, the newly named Mothership houses Stanley's work space -- along with lots of other solo entrepreneurs spread out among the various desks and sofas collected over the years. The Mothership also has a store/art space, which is Stanley's favorite spot for finding art and other goods by North Carolina-based makers, some of whom are her friends and yoga students. "It's an awesome place to get local Durham stuff," she says. "Not only does it support different artists and makers who are in this area, but (the shop was) also created by people who are themselves makers and creators." Among her favorites are Evan McIntyre's art, RIVTAK clothing and accessories, Big Spoon Roasters and The Zen Succulent, which also has a shop downtown. And when she hits a wall creatively, wandering through the Mothership store can inspire her creativity. "If I looked at only yoga things all the time, I would never come up with any new ideas," she says. "It's really important to be looking at and appreciating every kind of expression." The Mothership, 401 West Geer Street, Durham NC, 27701; +1 919-381-6306 The Zen Succulent, 125 E Parrish Street, Suite 100 A, Durham, NC 27701; +1 919-480-1762 Lunch can be more than barbecue Just a five-minute drive from downtown, Palace International, which specializes in Kenyan and East African cuisine, is Stanley's latest favorite go-to spot. It's where she can easily bump into friends and fans who also love the chicken karanga, curry goat, lentils, samosas (which came to Kenya via Indian immigrants) and other African food served by Caren and Maurice Ochola and their grown children, Moses Ochola and Suzanna Ochola-Love. Joined by friend and local bartender Lisa Williams, who she met while the two were working at Mateo tapas bar, Stanley raves about the food. "How has there been this amazing African food right under my nose and I didn't even know?" she says. "These oxtails are insane. The chicken is insane." "As a person who did not really grow up eating traditional African cuisine, even being African-American, it is awesome to have it within arm's reach and that it's so good," she says. Asked by Stanley if any of the food is Americanized, Suzanna Ochola-Love laughs and says no. "I promise you, you can fly to Kenya right now, take a bus into Kisumu and you will get food just like this." Palace International, 1104 A Broad St Durham, NC 27705; +1 919-416-4922 Stop by the farmers' market Located under the Pavilion at Central Park, the Durham Farmers' Market is open year-round -- although there's more variety and longer hours when it's not winter. Stanley recommends the flowers at Bluebird Meadows and whatever's for sale at Tiny Farm and Funny Girl Farm. There are often food trucks right across the street, along with art for sale -- all organized by the Art Market at Vega Metals, a cooperative artist collaboration featuring metal artwork. A recent Saturday had abortion rights activists selling baked goods. "I love the farmers' market because it's a perfect representation of the entrepreneurial spirit that truly unites Durham. I always leave feeling a stronger connection to my city," Stanley says. Aren't visiting during its operating hours? Head to Bulldega, the downtown market that features many locally grown and produced products, including Funny Girl Farm, Big Spoon Roasters and a living herb wall. Durham Farmers' Market, the Pavilion at Durham Central Park, 501 Foster Street, Durham, NC 27701 Bulldega Urban Market, 104 City Hall Plaza, Ste 100,Durham, NC 27701; +1 919-680-4682 Time for ice cream, locally made A local favorite for fabulous ice cream, The Parlour was launched as a food truck in May of 2011. Using crowdfunding to pay for some of their kitchen equipment, owners Yoni and Vanessa Mazuz opened a brick and mortar store in April 2013 focusing on interesting and local ingredients. Coconut curry with candied cashews, orange blossom with candied ginger, sweet corn with black raspberry and coriander goat cheese with strawberry swirl are currently on the menu. "It is a symbol of how entrepreneurship blooms in the city and the product is amazing," says Stanley, who often stops by to see her friend Bahar Karkuki, the shop's general manger. "Any time that they can, they source local ingredients. " Dashi, Dos Perros, Alley 26, Rue Cler and other restaurants serve their ice cream, which is often made to fit their cuisine: Dashi, a ramen shop, serves its green tea ice cream. Need a slice of pie to go with that scoop? Scratch, operated by James Beard semi-finalist Phoebe Lawless, is just a couple blocks away (and a second location is in the works). The Parlour has hosted events with the East Durham Pie Company on Pi Day (March 14) to serve pie with its ice cream. The pie company plans to open a storefront this year. The Parlour, 117 Market Street, Durham, NC 27701; +1 919-564-7999 Scratch, 111 Orange Street, Durham, NC 27701; +1 919-956-5200 Dinnertime at Durham's hottest new restaurants Dinnertime in Durham creates some hard decisions. Downtown, chef Michael Lee operates M Sushi (focused on seafood) and M Kokko (focused on chicken) from the same kitchen. Look for the unmarked separate entrance to write your name on the M Kokko waiting list. He plans to open M Kogi to serve Korean barbeque and M Taco in the same neighborhood in early 2018.  Then there's Dashi, which is owned by husband-and-wife teams Nick Hawthorne-Johnson and Rochelle Johnson and Billy and Kelly Cotter. The Johnsons also own the Ponysaurus Brewing Company and the Cookery, a commercial space that has launched many a food truck. The Cotters' other venture is Toast, an Italian sandwich spot. On a late weekend night, however, Stanley returns to her Durham roots with restauranteur Matt Kelly's refined but warm Italian venture, Mothers and Sons, to celebrate the birthday of her partner Kori Higgs. Kelly already runs the successful Mateo, Vin Rouge, the New York-style Lucky's Deli with Drew Brown and is planning to open his newest spot, Saint James, to focus on seafood. "Mothers and Sons is a collaboration between Matt and his former chef de cuisine at Mateo Tapas, Josh DeCarolis, and Josh is like behind the helm at Mothers & Sons making the most amazing Italian food," says Stanley. "You cannot understand this pasta that Josh literally makes every day, rolls it out on the big table in there. He does it the way that he learned it in Italy from his people, and he really shares that with the people who come into the restaurant, and it's amazing." Mothers and Sons Trattoria, 107 West Chapel Hill Street, Durham, NC 27701; +1 919-294-8247 M Sushi/M Kokko, 311 Holland Street, Durham,NC 27701; +1 919-908-9266 Dashi, 415 E Chapel Hill St, Durham, NC 27701; +1 919-251-9335 After hours in Durhamun After finishing up at Mothers and Sons, Stanley and her posse head to the Atomic Fern social club to keep the celebration going. Durham is a small town, so the non-university nightlife isn't as extensive as in larger cities, but Stanley tends to find the fun spots and know the people who run them. On any given weekend, Stanley might head to the Atomic Fern (open until 2 a.m.), hear live music at the Pinhook (closes anywhere from midnight to 2 a.m.), hear jazz at Beyu Caffé (hours vary) or to Cosmic Cantina (closes at 4 a.m.) for its late-night scene. "Cosmic Cantina is one of the only restaurants in Durham that's open really late," she says. "You always ran into the most random people there at 3 o'clock in the morning. It's like the line will be out the door and you'll run into literally everybody at Cosmic." Atomic Fern, 108 East Parrish St, Durham, NC 27701; +1 919-908-8662 The Pinhook, 117 W Main St, Durham, NC 27701; +1 984-244-7243 Where to rest your head Durham has a hopping hotel scene that's worth exploring. The Durham, a one-time bank transformed into a boutique downtown 53-room hotel, hosts an all-day coffee bar in its lobby, and best of all, has beans ground fresh for every guest to make coffee in their own room every morning -- included in the room price. James Beard Award-winning Andrea Reusing runs the kitchen -- including room service and the rooftop bar, where locals head to watch the sunset. There is also a house-made coffee soda at the lobby coffee bar worth a visit, even for people not staying at the hotel. The city is also home to an outpost of the hip 21c chain, where the Art Deco Hill Building has been transformed into a 125-room hotel with an art exhibition space. Chef Thomas Card runs the kitchen at Counting House, the hotel's seafood-focused restaurant and bar. The art space is open to the public and guided tours are available Wednesday and Friday at 5 p.m. Even the original bank vault has been transformed into an art space. A mid-century motor lodge currently under renovation, the Unscripted Hotel Durham is scheduled to open in June across the street from the Durham. It will feature a diner, a pool deck and a pay-by-the-ounce taproom. The Durham Hotel, 315 E Chapel Hill St, Durham, NC 27701; 919-768-8830; Nightly rates start at $199 21c Museum Hotel Durham, 111 North Corcoran Street, Durham, North Carolina 27701; +1 919-956-6700; Nightly rates start at at $199 (weeknights) and $229 (weekends) Unscripted Hotel, 212 North Corcoran St, Durham, NC 27701; Opening April 2017, Nightly rates start at $169  
1491416373	http://money.cnn.com/2017/04/05/media/pepsi-pulls-kendall-jenner-ad/index.html	Pepsi pulls controversial Kendall Jenner protest ad after backlash - Apr. 5, 2017	Kendall Jenner's ad sparks controversy Pepsi has pulled its controversial Kendall Jenner ad. The soda company made the announcement Wednesday after the ad triggered an immediate online backlash for using protest imagery to market the soft drink. "Pepsi was trying to project a global message of unity, peace and understanding. Clearly we missed the mark, and we apologize," the company said in a statement. "We did not intend to make light of any serious issue. We are removing the content and halting any further rollout." Pepsi (PEP) also apologized to Jenner herself for putting her "in this position." The ad, in which Jenner participates in a photo shoot before joining a group of protesters and offering a Pepsi to a stoic police officer, was accused of appropriating the Black Lives Matter movement and using social justice to sell soda. Bernice King, a daughter of Martin Luther King Jr., was among those who commented on the tone-deaf nature of the ad. "If only Daddy would have known about the power of #Pepsi," she tweeted, with a black-and-white photo of her father being confronted by a highway patrol officer. Activist DeRay Mckesson tweeted sarcastically: "If I had carried Pepsi I guess I never would've gotten arrested. Who knew?" Comedian Jim Gaffigan also mocked the ad in a tweet. "'But you said you wanted social media to talk about Pepsi.' - Advertising guy to Pepsi executive before agency is fired," Gaffigan tweeted. CNNMoney (New York) First published April 5, 2017: 1:32 PM ET
1491416289	http://money.cnn.com/2017/04/01/technology/internet-privacy-protection-rules-jon-leibowitz/index.html	Former FTC chief: Privacy fears are 'hyper-partisan hyperbole' - Apr. 1, 2017	Is your internet privacy dead? The fear surrounding Congress's decision to roll-back some Obama-era internet privacy rules is just "hyper-partisan hyperbole," says former Federal Trade Commission chair Jon Leibowitz. Leibowitz headed the FTC under President Obama and now chairs the 21st Century Privacy Coalition, which opposes the rules. He told CNN's Michael Smerconish that Americans still have privacy protections. "It is more accurate to say the status quo will continue," Leibowitz said. In October, the Federal Communication Commission instituted rules that would prevent internet service providers from selling customers' personal information without their consent, and these are the regulations that were overturned last week. Related: Trump supports repeal of Internet privacy protections But Leibowitz said consumers' fears are misplaced. He said other privacy protections are still in place, and violating some of them could subject internet providers to federal enforcement action. Doing away with the FCC rules, Leibowitz said, will allow regulators to implement a new set of rules that can be applied across the entire industry. Right now, he said, the FCC regulates internet service providers, like AT&T (T, Tech30) and Verizon (VZ, Tech30), but the FTC regulates tech firms like Google (GOOG) and Facebook (FB, Tech30). Regulating their privacy practices separately causes confusion for companies and consumers, Leibowitz said, echoing the Republican argument to strip the FCC regulations. Related: Congress just killed your Internet privacy protections And Leibowitz argues those FCC rules are flawed anyway. What's going on in Washington right now, he said, is just overblown politics. "Washington, as we all know, is hyper-partisan these days, and privacy issues -- which should be nonpartisan and were nonpartisan at the FTC -- have become even more partisan. There's a lot of sky-is-falling hyperbole," Leibowitz said. "It'd be great if people could cut through this fact-free environment and talk about real issues," he said. Privacy advocates, consumer groups, members of the tech community and Congressional Democrats disagree. Massachusetts Congressman Michael Capuano was particularly vocal during the House debate on the topic. "What the heck were you thinking? Why would you want to give out any of your personal information to a faceless corporation for the sole purpose of them selling it? Give me one good reason," he said. Trump is expected to sign the bill overturning the FCC privacy rules once it crosses his desk. Correction: An earlier version of this story failed to identify Leibowitz as the chairman of the 21st Century Privacy Coalition, a group that opposes the FCC rules. CNNMoney (New York) First published April 1, 2017: 5:01 PM ET
1491417391	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/05/world/iyw-syria-resource-list-2/index.html	Help Syrians survive the conflict - CNN.com	(CNN)As Syria enters its seventh year of civil war, "the need for humanitarian aid and the protection of Syrian civilians has never been greater," according to UN Secretary-General Antonio Guterres. Tuesday, the country faced another crisis -- a chemical attack that killed at least 70 people, including 10 children. Since the war began in 2011, an estimated 400,000 Syrians have died. The fighting has also cost the country more than $16 billion of lost crop and livestock production and destroyed farming assets according to the UN. No matter where you live, there are ways you can help the Syrian people with food, shelter, medical aid and other basic needs. Simply click the button below and support organizations aiding those in crisis.  
1491417351	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/04/politics/tillerson-north-korea-statement/index.html	Rex Tillerson's incredibly odd and confusing statement on North Korea - CNNPolitics.com	(CNN)North Korea has fired a ballistic missile into the sea off the Korean Peninsula, the latest in a series of test firings and one that comes just days before President Donald Trump is set to huddle with Chinese President Xi Jinping for a two-day summit in Florida. Here's what Secretary of State Rex Tillerson, aka the nation's top diplomat, had to say about the latest provocation from North Korea: "North Korea launched yet another intermediate range ballistic missile. The United States has spoken enough about North Korea. We have no further comment." That's a total of 23 words, if you're counting. Twenty-three words that leave you more confused when you get to the end of them than when you started. Is Tillerson trying to talk tough? Or is he refusing to give North Korea the attention he thinks they're trying to grab in advance of the US-China meeting? Somewhere in between? Neither? Both? North Korea fires ballistic missile, US State Department says The statement reads, to channel Winston Churchill, like a riddle, wrapped in a mystery, inside an enigma. It's Ernest Hemingway but for complicated and delicate matters of foreign policy. It's, in a (hyphenated) word, a head-scratcher. What we do know is that the Trump administration is taking an increasingly hard line to both North Korea's ongoing efforts to develop nuclear and ballistic weapons programs and China's willingness to constrain those efforts. "The clock has now run out, and all options are on the table," a senior White House official told reporters Tuesday night in a briefing with reporters ahead of Xi's visit. That sentiment echoes the President himself, who told the Financial Times in an interview that he was prepared to act to curb North Korea's nuclear ambitions with or without China. "China has great influence over North Korea," Trump said in the interview. "And China will either decide to help us with North Korea, or they won't ... If China is not going to solve North Korea, we will. That is all I am telling you." Viewed through that lens, Tillerson's statement may be best understood as a sort of "the time for talking is over, the time for action is here" sentiment that is in keeping with the tough talk coming from Trump. In departure from Trump, US general says China must be part of North Korea solution But, Tillerson is the country's top diplomat -- the person charged with finding solutions that go beyond simple rhetoric to these thorniest of foreign policy challenges. And his statement -- such as it is -- offers zero guidance as to what the US response will be. Pyongyang wants Washington's acceptance as a nuclear power -- and to be dismissed in this way will be a blow, noted CNN's Paula Hancocks in Seoul. And two senior US officials tell CNN's Barbara Starr that the message shouldn't be interpreted as provocative. Instead, they say, it's a signal the State Department will no longer put out routine statements after every North Korean provocation or missile launch. But vagueness in diplomacy is a dangerous thing. Words matter. Misunderstandings can cause international incidents -- or worse. How will North Korea and China interpret Tillerson's comments? As a provocation? A dismissal? Something else entirely? That uncertainty is the point. Tillerson is the leading edge of America foreign policy. As such, his most important job is to ensure that other countries know exactly where the US stands when a major international event -- like the one in North Korea -- occurs. His statement Tuesday night suggests he simply doesn't grasp just how much words matter.  
1491416995	http://money.cnn.com/2017/04/05/technology/police-body-camera-taser-international-axon/index.html	Axon offers body cameras for every police officer in the U.S. - Apr. 5, 2017	What you should know about police body-worn cameras A Texas-based company just offered to equip every police officer in the United States with a body camera for one year. Axon (TASR) -- formerly known as Taser International -- said Wednesday that it will also provide police departments with all the hardware, data storage and training they need to use the devices. At the end of one year, police departments can choose to purchase the devices and docking stations, which cost $400 and $200, respectively, or return them to Axon. If they keep the devices, they'll also pay roughly $80 a month per camera for data storage. Related: Two police officers get real on body cameras All that will be free for the first year. And Axon founder and CEO Rick Smith said he expects the the body cameras will make it easier for officers to do their jobs, and will "drive important social change." "[The cameras] hold the potential to change police work as we know it, by seamlessly collecting an impartial record and reducing the need for endless paperwork. That's why we're giving this opportunity to every single police officer in America," Smith said. Related: Gun and body camera stocks surge after Dallas shooting Axon said the decision was inspired in part by a Pew Research Center study that found policing is more difficult today than ever before. "Cameras are the first of many steps toward a future where officers feel more confident and are freed from mundane report-writing to focus more time on community policing," Smith said. The company also announced Wednesday its decision to change its name to Axon, ditching "Taser International," as part of an expansion into new products. CNNMoney (New York) First published April 5, 2017: 2:29 PM ET
1491416946	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/05/us/severe-weather/index.html	Storms in Southeast: Tornado emergency issued for Sumter and Webster counties in Georgia - CNN.com	(CNN)The National Weather Service issued a tornado emergency Wednesday afternoon for Webster and Sumter counties in southwest Georgia, a rare incident only used when confirmed tornadoes are likely to cause catastrophic damage. The emergency warning stemmed from a system of storms barreling through the Southeastern United States that is expected to leave nearly 60 million people at risk of tornadoes, damaging winds and thunderstorms Wednesday, according to a CNN forecast. The storms will affect Alabama, Florida, Georgia and South Carolina before moving into the Ohio and Tennessee valleys, according to the National Weather Service. The storms were expected in two waves: one in the morning, and another in the afternoon and evening. The National Weather Service issued a tornado watch for a broad area, which means that conditions are favorable for severe weather. Strong winds and baseball-size hail were expected in parts of Alabama, where Gov. Robert Bentley declared a state of emergency ahead of the weather event. Jake Reed, a meteorologist for CNN affiliate WHNT-TV in Huntsville, Alabama, issued a stark warning of the coming storm on Facebook, saying it was "far and away the biggest threat Alabama has seen in quite some time." "The storms that form in the afternoon have the potential to pose a significant threat to life and property," he wrote. In Georgia, there was a chance for isolated tornadoes and hail, National Weather Service meteorologist Matthew Sena told CNN. Due to the weather, the Federal Aviation Administration issued a ground stop for flights at Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport just after 9 a.m. Delays are expected as the storm hits the area. At the Masters golf tournament in Augusta, Georgia, the Par 3 Contest was closed for the day due to the inclement weather. The weather system was also expected to bring heavy rains to the Interstate 20 corridor, including metro Atlanta, according to the National Weather Service. Rainfall amounts will average 1.5 to 2 inches, and a flash flood watch has been issued for that area, according to the weather service. The severe weather could last longer than Monday's storms and affect cities such as Atlanta and Augusta before it moves north by the end of the day, Sena said. At least five people died when a severe storm system swept through several Southern states over the weekend and Monday. CNN's Haley Brink and Dave Hennen contributed to this report. 
1491416822	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/05/politics/steve-bannon-national-security-council/index.html	What Steve Bannon's demotion tells us about the Trump White House - CNNPolitics.com	Washington (CNN)President Trump's decision to remove chief strategist Steve Bannon from the National Security Council's principals committee suggests a potentially significant change in the power balance among the four top White House advisers. Bannon's placement on the principals committee at the start of the Trump administration drew criticism not only from Democrats but also from many Republicans and prominent members of the intelligence community. The idea that Bannon, who, prior to his hiring as the chief political strategist to Trump's campaign, had been the CEO of a conservative news website, would sit on a committee typically reserved only for the upper echelon of the military, raised questions about the scope of his influence within the White House. It was part of a broader ascension of Bannon within the West Wing; he was widely regarded in the early days of the administration as a first among equals in a group that included chief of staff Reince Priebus, counselor Kellyanne Conway and son-in-law Jared Kushner. That ascension has clearly faltered. The removal of Bannon from the NSC comes in the wake of a series of other moves -- most notably the arrival of Trump's daughter, Ivanka, in the West Wing -- that suggest that the president is moving away (at least for the moment) from the more hard-line ideological bent of Bannon. "I always believed Steve would be first senior adviser to leave the White House," said one former Trump aide granted anonymity to speak candidly. "He's an ideologue. Trump is not. He has to get frustrated." The Trump White House sought to spin the Bannon decision not as a demotion but rather a natural conclusion to his initial appointment to the principals committee. But, that doesn't really check out. If Bannon's position on the NSC was always meant to be temporary why not say that from the outset? It's hard not to see the Bannon move in the broader context of Trump's first 75 days in office, which have been, to put it mildly, chaotic. The attempt to overhaul the Affordable Care Act ended before it ever started, an 18-day debacle that showed that Trump's challenges within his own party were far larger than he seemed to believe. He continues to labor under a self-inflicted controversy regarding his unproven allegation that President Obama wiretapped him during the 2016 campaign. The numerous ties between senior campaign aides and Russian intelligence officials -- as well as the ongoing Justice Department investigation into these ties -- show no signs of being knocked off front pages. All of it has created a toxic political environment for Trump. His approval rating in Gallup's daily tracking poll is mired in the mid 30s; it's at 37% in the three-day rolling average today. That marks a historic low for a president so new to the office. The lowest approval number Gallup measured for Obama in his first year was 49% in November 2009. For George W. Bush it was 51% in September 2001. hile Trump -- like all politicians -- is loathe to admit a change of direction is needed or that mistakes have been made, it's hard to look at his current position and conclude anything else. To be clear: Bannon will remain in the White House -- and in a senior role. But the diminution of his power -- and in such a public way -- is a clear sign that a shakeup in the Trump power structure is under way. Trump, of course, is mercurial. Bannon may have fallen out of favor -- for now. But, almost nothing is set in stone in the world of Donald Trump so in a month or two we could be talking about Bannon's reassertion of primacy in the Trump orbit. But, that's not the story today.  
1491416691	http://money.cnn.com/2017/04/05/technology/facebook-revenge-porn/index.html	Facebook launches photo-matching tools to combat spread of revenge porn - Apr. 5, 2017	Her nude photos leaked online. Now she's fighting back Revenge porn is pervasive, and Facebook wants to do its part to stop it from spreading on its platforms. The term refers to non-consensual pornography that's distributed online to shame, exploit or extort its victims. And on Wednesday, the company said it would apply photo-matching to ensure intimate, nonconsensual images that are reported once aren't able to be uploaded again through Facebook's properties, including Messenger and Instagram. Facebook (FB, Tech30) said once an image is reported, it is reviewed by the company's community operations team and then photo-matching will be applied. From there, "if someone tries to share the image after it's been reported and removed, we will alert them that it violates our policies and that we have stopped their attempt to share it," Facebook head of global safety Antigone Davis said in a company blog post. A study from Data & Society Research Institute found that one in 25 people has been a victim of either threats, or actual posts, of revenge porn. The phenomenon is emotionally distressing, even resulting in some publicized suicides as a result of the shame and bullying that often results. "It's wrong, it's hurtful, and if you report [revenge porn] to us, we will now use AI and image recognition to prevent it from being shared across all of our platforms," said CEO Mark Zuckerberg in a Facebook post Wednesday afternoon. "We're focused on building a community that keeps people safe." Facebook partnered up with the Cyber Civil Rights Initiative to develop its approach, and also launched "Not Without My Consent," a guide to help people through the process. "We're very pleased about Facebook's announcement," Dr. Mary Anne Franks, Cyber Civil Rights Initiative's legislative and tech policy director, told CNNTech. "These new tools demonstrate Facebook's leadership and innovation in responding to abuses of technology." According to Franks, her relationship with the company dates back to 2014, when she was asked to give a presentation about nonconsensual pornoagraphy as part of the company's safety series. Facebook (FB, Tech30) sponsored a cross-industry summit on the issue featuring presentations by CCRI in February 2015, Franks said. Related: The 20-year-old leading the March Against Revenge Porn "We have been working with Facebook on this issue ever since. In addition to helping them develop reporting and support procedures, we have been urging Facebook (and other companies) to move beyond purely reactive approaches to the problem and to adopt more preemptive measures, such as photo-matching," she said. There's currently no federal law against revenge porn. Thirty-five states and Washington, D.C., have enacted state laws against it, but online harassment laws (which include revenge porn) are notoriously weak and rarely match the damage revenge porn creates. For some victims, the only way to get their pictures off the internet has been to copyright their own naked bodies and sue on intellectual property grounds. The issue is one that's hit Facebook hard, in the form of a lawsuit. Facebook lost its bid in September to stop a lawsuit by a 14-year old girl whose naked photo appeared on its site. The girl is suing Facebook and the man who repeatedly posted her photo. At the time, Facebook did not comment on why this image -- once flagged -- wasn't caught by the PhotoDNA system, a tool used by a number of tech companies including Twitter (TWTR, Tech30) to detect and stop the spread of child porn. Related: Can a prenup for sex tapes keep you safe? The vast majority of revenge porn affects private citizens, but the issue has made headlines as celebrities have fallen victim as well. In August, hackers posted nude photos of comedian Leslie Jones on her web page, prompting federal authorities to investigate. Earlier this month, news surfaced that an ex-boyfriend of actress Mischa Barton was shopping around sexually explicit photos of her. Some lawmakers have pushed for reform, including Representative Jackie Speier, who proposed the Intimate Privacy Protection Act in July to criminalize revenge porn. CNNMoney (New York) First published April 5, 2017: 10:46 AM ET
1491416688	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/05/golf/play-suspended-at-masters-par-3-contest/index.html	Masters 2017: Play suspended at Par 3 Contest - CNN.com	(CNN)The severe weather in the Southeast suspended play Wednesday at the Masters Par 3 Contest at Augusta National Golf Club in Augusta, Georgia. "The course will be closed for the remainder of the day," the Masters Twitter account says. Earlier in the day, before the Par 3 Contest began, the course was evacuated. Play started at 12:30 p.m. ET, the same time the gates reopened to patrons. The event originally was scheduled to start at noon ET. Only two players, Bubba Watson and Webb Simpson, finished the nine-hole course. The Par 3 Contest, which has been taking place since 1960, occurs the day before the start of the Masters Tournament. According to the Masters website, tournament participants, noncompeting past champions and honorary Invitees are invited to participate in the Par 3 Contest. No Par 3 Contest winner has followed that with a Masters Tournament victory that same week. The 81st edition of the Masters Tournament starts Thursday.  
1491416642	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/05/politics/trump-today-live-updates/index.html	President Trump today: Live updates - CNNPolitics.com	President Trump meets with the King of Jordan and responds to the suspected chemical attack Syria. Meanwhile, the Senate goes to battle over Neil Gorsuch for Supreme Court. We're covering Trump's 76th day in office in real time.  
1491418232	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/04/travel/jessamyn-stanley-durham-nc-one-perfect-day/index.html	A local's guide to what's new and cool in Durham, NC - CNN.com	Durham, NC (CNN)Yoga teacher Jessamyn Stanley hasn't been seated more than a couple minutes at her favorite new restaurant, Palace International, when two women eating lunch nearby recognize her. "Oh, are you the one that does yoga?" asks the first woman, smiling nervously. "I follow you!" "Yes, hi," replies Stanley, squirming a little at the attention. The woman continues to praise Stanley, telling her that Stanley's Instagram posts have helped give larger women a positive body image. People recognize Stanley whenever she's home in Durham, North Carolina -- not just for her hardcore yoga classes, but because of her social media presence. Using her Instagram and YouTube accounts, she advocates yoga for everyone, busting through the yoga stereotype of the slim, white, heterosexual woman who can afford group classes and pretty props. A native of nearby Greensboro, Stanley was unhappily attending graduate school in Winston-Salem when she turned to yoga to find some relief. She had tried it before but this time, it took. Yoga gave her the courage to leave her program and move to Durham five years ago, with no job or friends to speak of. After she moved, she was reeling from the loss of a seven-year relationship and the death of her aunt, and yoga became her saving grace. And her first job at Mateo, Durham restaurateur Matt Kelly's highly-regarded downtown tapas restaurant, gave Stanley a front row seat to the redevelopment of the Bull City, so called after the Bull Durham Tobacco brand launched by the Blackwell Tobacco Company in the 1800s. From tobacco central to smaller makers Once home to a bustling tobacco industry and a four-block "Black Wall Street" area of African-American-owned financial enterprises, Durham had become a place in the late 1980s where the mostly white, middle classes from nearby Raleigh and Chapel Hill would not go after dark. Now the city is bustling with new hotels, farm-to-table restaurants, a busy and engaged farmers' market (even in winter), a food truck scene, ethically sourced coffee shops and storefronts selling locally made foods and home goods. Some of that is thanks to the health care and life sciences industries, Duke University and Counter Culture Coffee, which is headquartered in Durham and has a roasting facility, training center and Friday open tastings here. But much credit also goes to the hustle of independent artists and entrepreneurs, including Stanley and her friends, who moved into the city and made it their home. Getting priced out of the city Stanley loves is a possibility she and her friends debate endlessly, fighting for a city living wage and gender identity/LGBTQ protections, even as they recommend their favorite places for visitors to check out. Any newbie to the Bull City may want to pop into Duke Gardens, the new Durham Bulls baseball park, the American Tobacco Historic District, Dame's Chicken & Waffles and The Pit's Durham location -- pick your meat and sauce -- to get a sense of place. Stanley does occasionally eat at the Pit and do yoga at Duke Gardens, but some of her favorite spots are mostly known by the locals who live and breathe Durham. Before Stanley heads out on tour for her new book, "Every Body Yoga," which releases April 4, she took CNN to visit some of those spots around Durham on a rare day off. Wake up with sustainable coffee After waking up and doing some morning yoga, Stanley first heads to Cocoa Cinnamon, which is owned by husband-and-wife team Areli and Leon Barrera de Grodski. Cocoa Cinnamon's first location sits on a corner in Durham's Central Park neighborhood, filled with regulars drinking Counter Culture coffee and specialty drinks as they work at the collection of tables. The most popular is the Dr. Durham, says the barista, which consists of a latte with slightly frothier microfoam with homemade vanilla topped with maca root powder, ginger root powder and black lava salt. "Did you enjoy your trip?" Stanley asks Areli Barrera de Grodski, who's behind the counter today, as she orders her favorite Moctezuma, a latte with dulce de leche and cayenne pepper. "Yeah, I got to visit the southern part of Peru, went to Machu Picchu and realized that it's like all about astrology," Areli replies. The coffee shop, which started as a mobile bike (not a truck) and opened this storefront in 2013, now has two locations and is building a third. The couple have built their business on sourcing many of its ingredients locally and its coffee sustainably, and paying workers a living wage. Cocoa Cinnamon, 420 West Geer Street, Durham, NC, 27701 Buying locally, supporting friends Located around the corner from Cocoa Cinnamon, the newly named Mothership houses Stanley's work space -- along with lots of other solo entrepreneurs spread out among the various desks and sofas collected over the years. The Mothership also has a store/art space, which is Stanley's favorite spot for finding art and other goods by North Carolina-based makers, some of whom are her friends and yoga students. "It's an awesome place to get local Durham stuff," she says. "Not only does it support different artists and makers who are in this area, but (the shop was) also created by people who are themselves makers and creators." Among her favorites are Evan McIntyre's art, RIVTAK clothing and accessories, Big Spoon Roasters and The Zen Succulent, which also has a shop downtown. And when she hits a wall creatively, wandering through the Mothership store can inspire her creativity. "If I looked at only yoga things all the time, I would never come up with any new ideas," she says. "It's really important to be looking at and appreciating every kind of expression." The Mothership, 401 West Geer Street, Durham NC, 27701; +1 919-381-6306 The Zen Succulent, 125 E Parrish Street, Suite 100 A, Durham, NC 27701; +1 919-480-1762 Lunch can be more than barbecue Just a five-minute drive from downtown, Palace International, which specializes in Kenyan and East African cuisine, is Stanley's latest favorite go-to spot. It's where she can easily bump into friends and fans who also love the chicken karanga, curry goat, lentils, samosas (which came to Kenya via Indian immigrants) and other African food served by Caren and Maurice Ochola and their grown children, Moses Ochola and Suzanna Ochola-Love. Joined by friend and local bartender Lisa Williams, who she met while the two were working at Mateo tapas bar, Stanley raves about the food. "How has there been this amazing African food right under my nose and I didn't even know?" she says. "These oxtails are insane. The chicken is insane." "As a person who did not really grow up eating traditional African cuisine, even being African-American, it is awesome to have it within arm's reach and that it's so good," she says. Asked by Stanley if any of the food is Americanized, Suzanna Ochola-Love laughs and says no. "I promise you, you can fly to Kenya right now, take a bus into Kisumu and you will get food just like this." Palace International, 1104 A Broad St Durham, NC 27705; +1 919-416-4922 Stop by the farmers' market Located under the Pavilion at Central Park, the Durham Farmers' Market is open year-round -- although there's more variety and longer hours when it's not winter. Stanley recommends the flowers at Bluebird Meadows and whatever's for sale at Tiny Farm and Funny Girl Farm. There are often food trucks right across the street, along with art for sale -- all organized by the Art Market at Vega Metals, a cooperative artist collaboration featuring metal artwork. A recent Saturday had abortion rights activists selling baked goods. "I love the farmers' market because it's a perfect representation of the entrepreneurial spirit that truly unites Durham. I always leave feeling a stronger connection to my city," Stanley says. Aren't visiting during its operating hours? Head to Bulldega, the downtown market that features many locally grown and produced products, including Funny Girl Farm, Big Spoon Roasters and a living herb wall. Durham Farmers' Market, the Pavilion at Durham Central Park, 501 Foster Street, Durham, NC 27701 Bulldega Urban Market, 104 City Hall Plaza, Ste 100,Durham, NC 27701; +1 919-680-4682 Time for ice cream, locally made A local favorite for fabulous ice cream, The Parlour was launched as a food truck in May of 2011. Using crowdfunding to pay for some of their kitchen equipment, owners Yoni and Vanessa Mazuz opened a brick and mortar store in April 2013 focusing on interesting and local ingredients. Coconut curry with candied cashews, orange blossom with candied ginger, sweet corn with black raspberry and coriander goat cheese with strawberry swirl are currently on the menu. "It is a symbol of how entrepreneurship blooms in the city and the product is amazing," says Stanley, who often stops by to see her friend Bahar Karkuki, the shop's general manger. "Any time that they can, they source local ingredients. " Dashi, Dos Perros, Alley 26, Rue Cler and other restaurants serve their ice cream, which is often made to fit their cuisine: Dashi, a ramen shop, serves its green tea ice cream. Need a slice of pie to go with that scoop? Scratch, operated by James Beard semi-finalist Phoebe Lawless, is just a couple blocks away (and a second location is in the works). The Parlour has hosted events with the East Durham Pie Company on Pi Day (March 14) to serve pie with its ice cream. The pie company plans to open a storefront this year. The Parlour, 117 Market Street, Durham, NC 27701; +1 919-564-7999 Scratch, 111 Orange Street, Durham, NC 27701; +1 919-956-5200 Dinnertime at Durham's hottest new restaurants Dinnertime in Durham creates some hard decisions. Downtown, chef Michael Lee operates M Sushi (focused on seafood) and M Kokko (focused on chicken) from the same kitchen. Look for the unmarked separate entrance to write your name on the M Kokko waiting list. He plans to open M Kogi to serve Korean barbeque and M Taco in the same neighborhood in early 2018.  Then there's Dashi, which is owned by husband-and-wife teams Nick Hawthorne-Johnson and Rochelle Johnson and Billy and Kelly Cotter. The Johnsons also own the Ponysaurus Brewing Company and the Cookery, a commercial space that has launched many a food truck. The Cotters' other venture is Toast, an Italian sandwich spot. On a late weekend night, however, Stanley returns to her Durham roots with restauranteur Matt Kelly's refined but warm Italian venture, Mothers and Sons, to celebrate the birthday of her partner Kori Higgs. Kelly already runs the successful Mateo, Vin Rouge, the New York-style Lucky's Deli with Drew Brown and is planning to open his newest spot, Saint James, to focus on seafood. "Mothers and Sons is a collaboration between Matt and his former chef de cuisine at Mateo Tapas, Josh DeCarolis, and Josh is like behind the helm at Mothers & Sons making the most amazing Italian food," says Stanley. "You cannot understand this pasta that Josh literally makes every day, rolls it out on the big table in there. He does it the way that he learned it in Italy from his people, and he really shares that with the people who come into the restaurant, and it's amazing." Mothers and Sons Trattoria, 107 West Chapel Hill Street, Durham, NC 27701; +1 919-294-8247 M Sushi/M Kokko, 311 Holland Street, Durham,NC 27701; +1 919-908-9266 Dashi, 415 E Chapel Hill St, Durham, NC 27701; +1 919-251-9335 After hours in Durham After finishing up at Mothers and Sons, Stanley and her posse head to the Atomic Fern social club to keep the celebration going. Durham is a small town, so the non-university nightlife isn't as extensive as in larger cities, but Stanley tends to find the fun spots and know the people who run them. On any given weekend, Stanley might head to the Atomic Fern (open until 2 a.m.), hear live music at the Pinhook (closes anywhere from midnight to 2 a.m.), hear jazz at Beyu Caffé (hours vary) or to Cosmic Cantina (closes at 4 a.m.) for its late-night scene. "Cosmic Cantina is one of the only restaurants in Durham that's open really late," she says. "You always ran into the most random people there at 3 o'clock in the morning. It's like the line will be out the door and you'll run into literally everybody at Cosmic." Atomic Fern, 108 East Parrish St, Durham, NC 27701; +1 919-908-8662 The Pinhook, 117 W Main St, Durham, NC 27701; +1 984-244-7243 Where to rest your head Durham has a hopping hotel scene that's worth exploring. The Durham, a one-time bank transformed into a boutique downtown 53-room hotel, hosts an all-day coffee bar in its lobby, and best of all, has beans ground fresh for every guest to make coffee in their own room every morning -- included in the room price. James Beard Award-winning Andrea Reusing runs the kitchen -- including room service and the rooftop bar, where locals head to watch the sunset. There is also a house-made coffee soda at the lobby coffee bar worth a visit, even for people not staying at the hotel. The city is also home to an outpost of the hip 21c chain, where the Art Deco Hill Building has been transformed into a 125-room hotel with an art exhibition space. Chef Thomas Card runs the kitchen at Counting House, the hotel's seafood-focused restaurant and bar. The art space is open to the public and guided tours are available Wednesday and Friday at 5 p.m. Even the original bank vault has been transformed into an art space. A mid-century motor lodge currently under renovation, the Unscripted Hotel Durham is scheduled to open in June across the street from the Durham. It will feature a diner, a pool deck and a pay-by-the-ounce taproom. The Durham Hotel, 315 E Chapel Hill St, Durham, NC 27701; 919-768-8830; Nightly rates start at $199 21c Museum Hotel Durham, 111 North Corcoran Street, Durham, North Carolina 27701; +1 919-956-6700; Nightly rates start at at $199 (weeknights) and $229 (weekends) Unscripted Hotel, 212 North Corcoran St, Durham, NC 27701; Opening April 2017, Nightly rates start at $169  
1491418164	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/05/opinions/global-gag-rule-life-death-opinion-kuo/index.html	Global Gag Rule: The result is life or death (opinion) - CNN.com	Caroline Kuo is the inaugural Dean of Diversity and Inclusion at Brown University School of Public Health and a professor in the Department of Behavioral and Social Sciences. She is a fellow with the Public Voices Greenhouse through The OpEd Project. The views expressed in this commentary are her own. (CNN)Thandiwe, whose name has been changed to protect her identity, wakes up every morning at 6 a.m. to iron her school uniform in a township on the outskirts of Cape Town, South Africa. She times her walk to make it as quickly and safely as possible over the main artery of the township, through narrow alleyways and into her middle school. Walking alone, Thandiwe is necessarily wary. South Africa has some of the highest rates of rape and sexual assault in the world. Over a quarter of South African men reported they perpetrated rape, with 1 in 20 men reporting rape of a child under 15, according to a survey by Dr. Rachel Jewkes at the South African Medical Research Council. South Africa also has the largest HIV epidemic in the world. If a girl or young woman is raped, it is possible to prevent her from getting HIV. However, she must get life-saving medication as soon as possible, and ideally within 72 hours of an assault from a clinic that is accessible and close by. These are the clinics and services that face closure under the Mexico City Policy, which prohibits funding to nongovernmental organizations offering information, referrals and services for abortion as part of comprehensive sexual and reproductive health education. President Donald Trump signed an executive memorandum to reinstate the policy earlier this year, restricting how foreign nongovernmental organizations spend their money for a full spectrum of life-saving reproductive health services if they receive any amount of money from the US government. And, on Monday, the US State Department notified the Senate Foreign Relations Committee that US funding for the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) would be withdrawn on the grounds that UNFPA supports coercive abortion or involuntary sterilization. UNFPA responded in a statement clearly refuting this assertion with details of its lifesaving work in over 150 countries and territories. Defunding UNFPA is just the latest Trump administration policy decision, of several, that undermines the health and safety of girls across the globe. Advocates of these Trump administration policies describe them as anti-abortion policies. Opponents argue these policies takes away knowledge and access to safe abortions as a choice for girls, women and families. Since its initiation in 1984, various presidential administrations have rescinded and reinstated the Mexico City Policy. A study by Dr. Eran Bendavid at Stanford University School of Medicine shows the policy never worked as intended. After analyzing abortion rates in African countries over 14 years, whenever the Mexico City Policy was restored, Bendavid's team found women were two and a half times more likely to get abortions in African countries implementing the policy compared to countries where the policy was not applied. This evidence indicates the Mexico City Policy was detrimental to nongovernmental organizations providing modern contraceptives, inadvertently leading to more, rather than fewer abortions. This failed policy was -- and continues to be -- a danger to the reproductive health of girls and women. What is even more dangerous now is the expansion of the policy under the current executive memorandum. In this iteration, the reinstated policy is being expanded from family planning to restrict spending for any organization that accepts US government global health funding. Organizations newly captured under this expansion include those involved in life-saving HIV and AIDS prevention, treatment and response (along with delivery of other critical health programs such as childhood vaccinations, nutrition, malaria and more) -- the kind young girls like Thandiwe rely on. This reinstated policy also expands restrictions so that organizations cannot spend other streams of funding on these essential programs if they accept any amount of US government funding, and choose to provide comprehensive sexual and reproductive health information, referrals, and services. The US government spends $6.6 billion annually to address the global HIV epidemic. This includes the President's Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief, better known as PEPFAR. Last year, PEPFAR provided lifesaving HIV treatment to 11.5 million children, women, and men; cared and supported 6.2 million orphans and vulnerable children; prevented 2 million babies from being born with HIV; and reached 1 million girls and young women with innovative prevention programs. Reinstating this policy now puts these lives at stake in addition to the reproductive health of girls and young women. More than 7,000 miles from the US in the streets of South Africa, there is a palatable sense of fear for people's lives with the pending full-scale implementation of this American policy decision. The impact of this American policy decision will be felt most in girls' and women's bodies, families affected by HIV, and in community organizations and hospital wards where activists, leaders, doctors, nurses and social workers work to stem the tide of the HIV and AIDS epidemic. The signed executive memorandum has not made it into the Federal Register. That is the "how-to" manual that breathes policies to life through action steps implemented in all federal bureaucracies affected by the order. The time to act is now. American citizens can still intervene to negate policies detrimental to girls and women worldwide. Do so by publicly voicing dissent to overturn this misguided executive memorandum. Do so by communicating your desire for action by federal representatives who control important aspects of implementation that can limit policy damage. And for all global citizens, do so by contributing your energy, time and funds to supporting the life-saving work of organizations that may disappear because of this policy. The Mexico City Policy has been reversed three times in 32 years. It is time to do so again.  
1491418114	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/05/app-news-section/quickly-catch-up-april-5-trnd/index.html	Quickly catch up: Wednesday, April 5 - CNN.com	(CNN)Here's what you might have missed on CNN today: -- President Trump, in response to a question on the chemical attack in Syria, said, "I now have responsibility." -- Meanwhile, international condemnation mounted over the apparent targeted chemical attack. Russia's claims that a regime airstrike on a "terrorist" ammunition depot was behind the attack were rejected. -- Steve Bannon was removed from his National Security Council role. -- Trump defended Bill O'Reilly in an interview with The New York Times, saying, "I don't think Bill did anything wrong." -- An F-16 crashed near Joint Base Andrews in Maryland. -- The United States may add airports to the electronics ban. -- Pepsi pulled its controversial Kendall Jenner ad. -- Another teen was accepted by all eight Ivy League schools.  
1491418100	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/05/politics/steve-bannon-national-security-council/index.html	What Steve Bannon's demotion tells us about the Trump White House - CNNPolitics.com	Washington (CNN)President Trump's decision to remove chief strategist Steve Bannon from the National Security Council's principals committee suggests a potentially significant change in the power balance among the four top White House advisers. Bannon's placement on the principals committee at the start of the Trump administration drew criticism not only from Democrats but also from many Republicans and prominent members of the intelligence community. The idea that Bannon, who, prior to his hiring as the chief political strategist to Trump's campaign, had been the CEO of a conservative news website, would sit on a committee typically reserved only for the upper echelon of the military, raised questions about the scope of his influence within the White House. It was part of a broader ascension of Bannon within the West Wing; he was widely regarded in the early days of the administration as a first among equals in a group that included chief of staff Reince Priebus, counselor Kellyanne Conway and son-in-law Jared Kushner. That ascension has clearly faltered. The removal of Bannon from the NSC comes in the wake of a series of other moves -- most notably the arrival of Trump's daughter, Ivanka, in the West Wing -- that suggest that the president is moving away (at least for the moment) from the more hard-line ideological bent of Bannon. "I always believed Steve would be first senior adviser to leave the White House," said one former Trump aide granted anonymity to speak candidly. "He's an ideologue. Trump is not. He has to get frustrated." The Trump White House sought to spin the Bannon decision not as a demotion but rather a natural conclusion to his initial appointment to the principals committee. But, that doesn't really check out. If Bannon's position on the NSC was always meant to be temporary why not say that from the outset? It's hard not to see the Bannon move in the broader context of Trump's first 75 days in office, which have been, to put it mildly, chaotic. The attempt to overhaul the Affordable Care Act ended before it ever started, an 18-day debacle that showed that Trump's challenges within his own party were far larger than he seemed to believe. He continues to labor under a self-inflicted controversy regarding his unproven allegation that President Obama wiretapped him during the 2016 campaign. The numerous ties between senior campaign aides and Russian intelligence officials -- as well as the ongoing Justice Department investigation into these ties -- show no signs of being knocked off front pages. All of it has created a toxic political environment for Trump. His approval rating in Gallup's daily tracking poll is mired in the mid 30s; it's at 37% in the three-day rolling average today. That marks a historic low for a president so new to the office. The lowest approval number Gallup measured for Obama in his first year was 49% in November 2009. For George W. Bush it was 51% in September 2001. hile Trump -- like all politicians -- is loathe to admit a change of direction is needed or that mistakes have been made, it's hard to look at his current position and conclude anything else. To be clear: Bannon will remain in the White House -- and in a senior role. But the diminution of his power -- and in such a public way -- is a clear sign that a shakeup in the Trump power structure is under way. Trump, of course, is mercurial. Bannon may have fallen out of favor -- for now. But, almost nothing is set in stone in the world of Donald Trump so in a month or two we could be talking about Bannon's reassertion of primacy in the Trump orbit. But, that's not the story today.  
1491418021	http://money.cnn.com/2017/04/04/media/list-oreilly-factor-advertisers-responses/index.html	Read what Bill O'Reilly's sponsors are saying about 'disturbing allegations' of harassment - Apr. 4, 2017	O'Reilly accuser: I'm not after money Fox News' "The O'Reilly Factor" is facing a rapidly growing exodus of advertisers in the wake of a New York Times report that five different women had reached settlements over allegations of sexual harassment or verbal abuse against the show's host, Bill O'Reilly. CNNMoney has reached out to dozens of the companies that have run ads on the program. Below is a list of the responses we've received so far, as well as some responses that companies have put on their Twitter accounts after users of that site asked them about their ads. Companies pulling their ads from "The O'Reilly Factor" Mercedes-Benz: "Yes, we had advertising running on The O'Reilly Factor (we run on most major cable news shows) and it has been reassigned in the midst of this controversy. The allegations are disturbing and, given the importance of women in every aspect of our business, we don't feel this is a good environment in which to advertise our products right now." Hyundai: "Hyundai currently has no advertising on The O'Reilly Factor. We had upcoming advertising spots on the show but are reallocating them due to the recent and disturbing allegations. As a company we seek to partner with companies and programming that share our values of inclusion and diversity. We will continue to monitor and evaluate the situation as we plan future advertising decisions." BMW of North America: "In light of the recent New York Times investigation, BMW of North America has suspended its advertising with 'The O'Reilly Factor.'" Mitsubishi: "Mitsubishi Motors takes these allegations very seriously and we have decided that we will pull our advertising at the present time. We will continue to monitor this situation as we assess our long-term strategy." Lexus: "We take our duties as a responsible advertiser seriously and have been closely monitoring the situation involving 'The O'Reilly Factor.' In response, we have asked our media-buying partners to move all Lexus ad inventory out of the program." Ainsworth Pet Nutrition: "We removed our advertising from the program because of these recent and disturbing allegations." Constant Contact: "Based on the recent allegations and our strong commitment to inclusion, respect and tolerance in the workplace, we have decided to pull Constant Contact's ads from The O'Reilly Factor." Credit Karma: "In light of the recent concerning allegations, we will not be advertising on this show and have asked for our ads to be removed." Bayer: "Bayer supports a safe, respectful and non-abusive environment for women and we have reached out to Fox to voice our concerns regarding this matter. Based on the serious nature of these allegations, we have made the decision to suspend all advertising on the program in question. This suspension has been requested immediately and will be handled as expeditiously as possible. We have been informed, however, that programming changes may not become effective immediately. It is important to note that Bayer purchases packages of advertising time across all major networks without selecting placement on any specific program. We regularly evaluate our advertising purchases to make sound judgments to continue or discontinue based upon our beliefs, values and ethical considerations." TrueCar: "Pending further assessment of recent developments, we have instructed our media buyer to direct our advertising to other programming." GlaxoSmithKline: "We are continually reviewing our advertising to ensure it is conducted in a responsible manner aligned with our values. We have temporarily put a hold on spots running on The O'Reilly Factor while we assess this situation." Sanofi: "At Sanofi Consumer Healthcare, decisions about advertising on any given website, network, magazine, or programs are never undertaken as an endorsement or non-endorsement of the host, editorial or entertainment content. Rather, our purpose in advertising our product is to provide important information to consumers so that they may make an informed decision about which product will best provide relief for their symptoms. The controversy around The O'Reilly Factor program and allegations made against Bill O'Reilly are matters that we take seriously and will continue to monitor. We do not endorse the behavior or opinions of program hosts or the content. We have reallocated our current advertising originally scheduled during this program. We will continue to monitor and evaluate the situation as we plan future advertising decisions." UNTUCKit: "As a company in which more than 2/3rd of our employees are women, we take sexual harassment claims very seriously. Moreover, it is important our corporate partners reflect the same principles of inclusivity and equality upon which we have built our brand. In light of the disturbing allegations, we instructed our media buyer this morning to reallocate our ad dollars to other shows effective immediately. We will continue to closely monitor the situation but believe this is the right decision at this time." Allstate: "Inclusivity and support for women are important Allstate values. We are concerned about the issues surrounding the program and we have suspended our advertising." Esurance: "In light of the recent controversies surrounding Bill O'Reilly and his treatment of women, Esurance is suspending its advertising during "The O'Reilly Factor." At Esurance, inclusion and support for women extends across all aspects of our business — from our associates to our customers to our partners. And we want to partner with organizations and programming that share those same values." T. Rowe Price: "We regularly evaluate our media buys to ensure alignment with our corporate values, and in light of the recent allegations we have decided to pull our upcoming ads from The O'Reilly Factor." Wayfair: "We do not have any future ad buys planned for the show at this time. We condemn all forms of harassment and are closely assessing the situation. We have advertised on the show in the past and in light of the reports have moved our spots to other programming while we assess the situation." Orkin: "Orkin buys its advertising in broad dayparts on networks that reach our target audience. We do not buy specific shows, including the O'Reilly Factor. The O'Reilly Factor is in the daypart that we buy on Fox, and we have added that show to our "Do Not Buy" list in the wake of the current allegations." Society for Human Resource Management: "SHRM has determined to cease its current advertising on the Fox News Network." The Wonderful Company: "At The Wonderful Company, we are committed to a respectful and inclusive workplace enviornment and insist upon the same from our business partners. We do not currently have or plan for ad inventory on this show." Coldwell Banker: "We were disappointed that our ad ran on O'Reilly as it wasn't part of our intentional media programming. We pulled future ads from the show." H&R Block: "We share your concern about recent allegations, and no longer advertise during The O'Reilly Factor as a result." Weather Tech: "We are already working on adjusting our advertising schedule and we appreciate your feedback." Advil: "We are no longer advertising on the Bill O'Reilly show." BambooHR: "BambooHR condemns workplace harassment, and in light of recent allegations, has canceled ads on The O'Reilly Factor." Jenny Craig: "As an organization, Jenny Craig condemns any and all forms of sexual harassment. As a matter of corporate policy, we do not publicly comment on our advertising strategy. We are constantly evaluating our media buys to maximize the efficiency of our corporate investment and effectively reach our target audience. However, we can confirm that we have suspended all ads on The O'Reilly Factor." Ancestry: "Equality and respect are core values for Ancestry, especially in the workplace. We will not support those whose actions conflict with those values. To be clear, we have pulled our ads from Bill O'Reilly." Subaru: "After review, we will no longer advertise during the Bill O'Reilly show in the future." Old Dominion Freight Line: "In light of the recent allegations surrounding the Bill O'Reilly show, OD has decided to discontinue our commercials from the show." Amica Insurance: "Our ads on The O'Reilly Factor are being pulled. It may take a few days for this to occur." LegalZoom: "This was not part of our intentional media programming and we have pulled all ads from this show." Invisalign: "Align Technology is redirecting its media buy for Invisalign spots and will not advertise on/around The O'Reilly Factor." Pacific Life: "As of today, Pacific Life is no longer an advertise on the O'Reilly Factor." Visionsworks: "Visionworks' media buy was with Fox News, not with any show specifically. Once we learned about the allegations, we pulled our ads from the program. Our media strategy is built around programming that aligns with our company's, and our customer's, core values. We continually review our advertising strategy and update on a quarterly basis, however when situations arise, we are able to work with our media partners to act swiftly to ensure our core values are embodied. After recent allegations on "The O'Reilly Factor," Visionworks has pulled all ads." Stanley Steemer: "We are in the process of removing our commercials from 'The O'Reilly Factor."' Companies currently evaluating whether or not to keep advertising on "The O'Reilly Factor" Trivago: "We are constantly reviewing our media buys to ensure we do not support any behavior that contradicts trivago's corporate values. We are currently reviewing the information available, but do not discuss our advertising strategy publicly." Enterprise Holdings: "We are looking into this, but we haven't made any decisions." TD Ameritrade: "We don't have a direct media buy with the program, and we have only run advertising on the show once in the last quarter. We have no plans to run anything else, at a minimum, until much later in the spring. Harassment in any form is unacceptable, and because one of our core values is People Matter, this is a situation that we are monitoring closely. If we need to make additional changes to our media buying strategy down the road, we have the flexibility to do so." Expedia: "We regularly evaluate all of our media buying, as we are doing now with regard to this program." Companies that will continue to advertise on "The O'Reilly Factor" Angie's List: "The advertising strategy we have long used at Angie's List is meant to reach as many people as possible with news that our service exists and is available to them. We place ads across a wide spectrum of venues intending to reach as many viewers/listeners/ readers as possible without taking a position on the viewpoints of the venues themselves. Just as we trust members to make their own hiring decisions, we trust them to make their own media consumption decisions." Companies that have ceased advertising on "The O'Reilly Factor" for other reasons CFP Board: "CFP Board does not have a partnership or a sponsorship with Fox News. Our television advertising is purchased through an advertising network where the advertisements are placed on multiple cable television channels and shows. As our spring flight is winding down, we will no longer have any placements on Fox News." Companies that aren't saying Quincy Bioscience: "We don't publicly comment on our advertising. As a company we condemn all forms of sexual harassment." CNNMoney (New York) First published April 4, 2017: 1:29 PM ET
1491417748	http://money.cnn.com/2017/04/05/news/economy/obamacare-approval-poll/index.html	More than half of Americans approve of Obamacare now, Gallup poll finds - Apr. 5, 2017	Provider's exit will leave thousands without insurance Obamacare is more popular now than it was on Election Day, despite President Trump and the GOP's efforts to dismantle it. Some 55% of Americans now support the Affordable Care Act, up from 42% in November, a new Gallup Poll found. This is the first time that a majority of Americans have approved of the health reform law since Gallup asked in November 2012. The Gallup poll results are more positive than some other polls, though all have shown an uptick in support of the law since the election. A new Kaiser Family Foundation poll found 46% of respondents have a favorable opinion, down a bit from its March survey, but up from the 43% in November. Americans' view of Obamacare are split along party lines, though all groups view the law more favorably now, according to Gallup. Some 86% of Democrats and 57% of independents approve it, while 17% of Republicans do. But, in November, only 7% of Republicans felt this way. Most Americans want to keep the law, but many want to see changes made. Some 26% want Obamacare to remain as is, but 40% think it needs "significant changes." Some 30% want the law repealed, Gallup found. Related: Revived GOP health care talks could hurt those with pre-existing conditions The now-shelved GOP plan to repeal and replace Obamacare didn't cut it for most Americans, according to the Kaiser survey. Some 64% said it was a "good thing" that Congress did not pass the American Health Care Act, while only 29% said it was a "bad thing." Some 55% thought it went too far in cutting existing programs, while only 35% felt it didn't do enough to end Obamacare. CNNMoney (New York) First published April 5, 2017: 2:42 PM ET
1491417517	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/05/politics/un-security-council-resolution-syria/index.html	Haley threatens 'our own action' in Syria if UN doesn't act - CNNPolitics.com	Washington (CNN)US Ambassador to the United Nations Nikki Haley strongly condemned Russia and the Syrian government Wednesday over the chemical weapons attack on civilians, suggesting that the US is open to using military action to solve the country's ongoing civil war. "When the UN consistently fails in its duty to act collectively, there are times in the life of states that we are compelled to take our own action," Haley said. Haley, who is also the UN Security Council president, was speaking as the council considers a resolution condemning the Assad regime for the attack, which killed dozens, including many children. Russia, which backs the regime of Syrian President Bashar al-Assad and has troops in Syria, is likely to veto the resolution. "How many more children have to die before Russia cares?" Haley said, leaving her presidency chair as she displayed photos of the victims. For now, Haley's comments are the most direct threat of unilateral action by the US about acting on the Syria crisis -- but they mark a departure from the Trump administration's more hands-off stance on Syria and may be more rhetoric than reality. Trump, speaking at the White House during a visit by Jordan's King Abdullah, said Wednesday that "we see what happened just recently yesterday in Syria horrible. Horrible, horrible thing. Unspeakable." First real test for Trump in Syria Assad will be watching to see if that's the extent of Trump's response, experts say. The gas attack marks the Syrian strongman's first real test of Trump, who repeatedly criticized former President Barack Obama for getting involved in Syria. In the immediate aftermath of the gas attack, the White House released a statement blaming Obama for the tragedy. Secretary of State Rex Tillerson told a March gathering of the international coalition to defeat ISIS that "there are many pressing challenges in the Middle East, but defeating ISIS is the United States number one goal in the region." That was interpreted by many to mean that the Obama administration goal of removing Assad from power and pushing for a political solution to the Syrian war had been set aside. Indeed, during a late March visit to Turkey, Tillerson said that Assad's fate "will be decided by the Syrian people," language that Syria, Iran and Russia have used to convey their intention that the Syrian leader isn't going anywhere. The next day, White House spokesman Sean Spicer said that "with respect to Assad, there is a political reality that we have to accept in terms of where we are right now." Critics such as Arizona Republican Sen. John McCain told CNN on Wednesday that Tillerson's comment was "one of the more incredible statements I've ever heard" and that he was sure that the Assad regime was "encouraged to know that the United States is withdrawing" from the conflict. Sen. Marco Rubio, R-Florida, went a step further when he said Wednesday that he doesn't think it's a coincidence that a suspected chemical weapons attack in Syria occurred shortly after Tillerson suggested Assad could remain in power. "In this case now, we have very limited options and look, it's concerning that the secretary of state, 72 hours ago or a week ago, last Friday, said that the future's up to the people in Syria on what happens with Assad. In essence, almost nodding to the idea that Assad was going to get to stay in some capacity," Rubio said on the show "AM Tampa Bay." "I don't think it's a coincidence that a few days later we see this," Rubio concluded. Tillerson has said that the administration backs the idea of creating "interim zones of stability" within Syria where refugees could go, but he didn't offer any detail on a plan that would require defending those zones and therefore heighten the risk of military clashes with Russia. The administration could explore other options, said Daniel Serwer, director of the Conflict Management Program at Johns Hopkins University. The US could go forward with the plan to declare and defend safe areas, Serwer said. It could identify and destroy the aircraft or artillery involved in launching the chemical weapons; it could launch an air attack on the Syrian and allied ground forces advancing on opposition-controlled areas. Trump could also push Moscow to stop Syria's use of chemical weapons, he added. "So far, Donald Trump has said this cannot be ignored by the civilized world, but has done nothing," Serwer said, adding that "Trump's failure to act is a green light for Assad to do as he likes." Security Council eyes resolution Representatives from the US, United Kingdom and France have ‎circulated a draft resolution demanding that the Syrian government provide flight logs from Tuesday, the day of the attack, which killed dozens, including many children. The draft also calls for meetings with Syrian generals or other officers. The resolution explicitly condemns the use of chemical weapons within Syria and states that their use represents a threat to international peace and security. An emergency Security Council meeting was called at UN headquarters in response to the suspected targeted attack. The Syrian military under Assad has denied responsibility for the attack, claiming it would never use chemical weapons. Multiple countries denounced the attack on Wednesday before and during the Security Council hearing. Bahram Qasemi, a spokesperson for Iran's Foreign Ministry, said the country "strongly condemns" the use of chemical weapons in Syria "regardless of the perpetrators and the victims." France's UN ambassador, François Delattre, said of the attack: "That reminds us of the day of the regime's attack on Damascus. This chemical horror opens a new spiral into the abyss of the human tragedy." But Russian Foreign Ministry spokeswoman Maria Zakharova blasted the resolution, telling reporters Wednesday it was "unacceptable" and that it was drafted too quickly. The UK and Chinese ambassadors also exchanged sharp words over responsibility for UN inaction. UK Ambassador Matthew Rycroft condemned prior vetoes by China and Russia, which blocked international action on Syria. But China's Ambassador Liu Jieyi, in a rare diplomatic outburst, said the UK delegate should stop "abusing" the Security Council. CORRECTION: An earlier version of this story misquoted Haley. CNN's Bijan Hosseini and Radina Gigova contributed to this report. 
1491417508	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/05/politics/king-abdullah-donald-trump-jordan/index.html	Abdullah and Trump: United against ISIS, divided on refugees - CNNPolitics.com	Washington (CNN)When King Abdullah II of Jordan was presented with a wave of refugees from Syria, he welcomed more than a million people into his country. When President Donald Trump was presented the same, he closed the door. The two world leaders who met Wednesday are united in the fight against ISIS -- a fact Trump heralded during a news conference in the White House Rose Garden -- but the duo are each other's antithesis when it comes to responding to the now ever-present issue of Syrian refugees. The meeting comes as the focus on Syria's ongoing civil war is at its brightest: The White House, along with activist groups and other foreign leaders, blamed forces tied to Syrian President Bashar al-Assad on Tuesday for a chemical attack in a rebel-controlled area of Syria. On Wednesday, Abdullah downplayed his differences with Trump regarding refugees, largely deflecting a question about Trump's refugee ban. And Trump pledged to help Jordan with strains caused by the influx of refugees looking to escape Syria. "We also acknowledged the vital role that Jordan has played in hosting refugees from the conflict in Syria," Trump said, adding that the United States will contribute more aide to Jordan for refugees. "This aid will help countries like Jordan host refugees until it is safe for them to return home," Trump said. "The refugees want to return home." Abdullah echoed this sentiment: "Most, if not all, Syrian refugees want to go back to Syria." Pictures of children writhing in pain from the attack have plastered TVs around the world, bringing into focus the human impact the ongoing war. White House officials said this week that Middle East peace and the refugee crisis will be among the topics the two world leaders will discuss Wednesday. Trump said Wednesday that the chemical attack "crossed a lot of lines" for him and changed his "attitude towards Syria and Assad has changed very much." The official White House visit is the second time Abdullah and Trump have seen each other this year. The two met briefly in February around an annual Washington prayer breakfast. Abdullah also met with Vice President Mike Pence in February to discuss the fight against terrorism and the Syrian crisis, according to the White House. But Wednesday's put a sharper focus on the differences between the two world leaders, especially in terms of the ongoing refugee issue that has put pressure on Jordan's economy. Jordan and the refugees The Syrian civil war has caused 4.81 million Syrians to flee their country, according to the United Nations, while 6.3 million people have been displaced internally. Jordan's response to the crisis was to take in over million refugees, the country's leaders have said, a decision that dramatically altered the make-up of the oil-less Middle Eastern country that shares a 233-mile border with Syria. The United Nations has registered close to 700,000 refugees in Jordan alone. "We really didn't have much choice," Abdullah told CBS in 2016. "They were flooding across the border, being shot by the Syrian regime and Jordan has always been a place that opens its arms to refugees from many countries unfortunately." The decision has increased Jordan's population by 20%, Abdullah said, straining the country's ability provide basic necessities, like water, to the refugees, while at the same time decreasing the services Jordanian citizens have received from their government. "Jordan is fatigued and has reached its maximum carrying capacity whether in terms of available resources," Jordanian Prime Minister Hani al-Mulki said Tuesday. "Without the continued support of the international community this will negatively impact our overstretched ability to continue providing necessary services to Syrians." Despite the troubles, though, Abdullah's decision stands in stark contrast with Trump, who -- days after assuming office in January -- directed his administration to shut the door on Syrian refugees. "I'm establishing new vetting measures to keep radical Islamic terrorists out of the United States of America. We don't want them here," Trump said as he signed the order. "We only want to admit those into our country who will support our country and love deeply our people." While that order -- and a subsequent order that looked to do something similar -- have been blocked by courts, the Trump administration has made clear that Syrian refugees will not be welcome without a pause in the program. Trump capped his presidential campaign by routinely promising to "suspend" the Syrian refugee program and slammed Hillary Clinton, his 2016 opponent, for advocating the United States increase the number of Syrian refugees they accept. "Hillary Clinton wants a 550% increase in Syrian refugees pouring into our countries," Trump said days before the election in Florida. "Her plan would mean generations of terrorism and extremism spreading in your schools and all throughout your communities." United against ISIS One area on which Trump and Abdullah do agree is the fight against ISIS, where both world leaders are supportive of going after the terrorist organization. Abdullah, a former special operations commander in Jordan, told CNN in 2015 that while ISIS is trying to link itself to Islam, "These people... are on the fringe of Islam." And he has cracked down violently on the group. When ISIS captured Jordanian pilot Moaz al-Kasasbeh in 2015 and killed him by putting him inside a cage and setting it on fire with a flamethrower, Abdullah responded by hanging two prisoners, including one that ISIS had previously requested be released. Jordan has also played a key role in the campaign against ISIS, regularly participating in air attacks against the group and sharing intelligence with the CIA and other American organizations. Trump campaigned on a platform of tough talk on ISIS, including pledging to "bomb the hell" out of the group. "I will quickly and decisively bomb the hell out of ISIS, will rebuild our military and make it so strong no-one -- and I mean, no one -- will mess with us," he said in a radio ad during the campaign. Trump heralded Abdullah as "a great warrior" who has been key in the fight against ISIS. And Abdullah said the fight against terror "has no borders, no nationality, no religion." "We are very encouraged with the president's determination to support Arab and Muslim states in their fight against terrorism," he added.  
1491418635	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/05/politics/trump-susan-rice/index.html	Donald Trump says Susan Rice broke the law. His evidence? Nothing. - CNNPolitics.com	Washington (CNN)President Donald Trump made a big accusation on Wednesday in an interview with the New York Times: Former Obama Administration national security adviser Susan Rice likely broke the law in requesting the names of Trump campaign officials caught up in the broader surveillance of Russian officials seeking to meddle in the 2016 election. "Do I think? Yes, I think," Trump told the Times, when asked whether Rice committed a crime. Big stuff, right? The President of the United States accusing the top national security adviser in his predecessor's administration of breaking the law! Trump must have some pretty conclusive evidence to make such a charge, right? Right?! Wrong. Or, at least, not proven -- or anything close. When pressed for evidence to back up his claim, Trump offered none -- instead doing what he often does in these sorts of situations: Promising that all will be revealed at some indeterminate time in the near(ish) future. Trump promised he would reveal the evidence to back up his explosive claim "at the right time" in the Times interview. He offered no further guidance of what that "right time" might be or if it ever will come. It is of course possible that Trump really does have evidence that justifies his claims about being wire-tapped and/or about alleged criminal activity by Rice. He is the president, after all, and is likely exposed to lots of information that the rest of us aren't. But the burden of proof for these allegations lies squarely on Trump because, well, everyone else in a position to know simply isn't saying the sort of things he is. A top national security official asking for the unmasking of a American citizen caught up in the incidental collection of surveillance data is not a crime. In fact, according to most national security experts, it's a routine measure often designed to assess the seriousness of a situation or a threat. Leaking such information would be a crime -- and seems to be where Trump was headed in the Times interview. But, Rice publicly denied that she did any sort of leaking of classified information in an interview with NBC's Andrea Mitchell on Tuesday. "I leaked nothing to nobody, and never have and never would," she said. In the face of such a categorical denial, it's incumbent on Trump to come forward with his promised evidence that led him to conclude Rice committed a crime. If the former national security adviser is lying about leaking classified information to the media regarding top staffers to the Trump campaign, that's something the public needs to know about -- and authorities need to act on -- immediately. The alternative explanation is that Trump is simply making an allegation without any clear and indisputable evidence to back it up. Given what we know of the initial Trump wire-tapping allegation, it's hard to rule that out as a possibility. Trump has never come forward with even a scintilla of evidence that what he claims about Obama ordered the wiretap are true. Instead he and his allies have sought to muddy the rhetorical waters regarding what the definition of "wire-tapping" actually is. The implications of that explanation are serious and concerning. If the President of the United States is willing to freelance like that with no evidence to back him up, it makes it hard to know when he is speaking from a position that is fact-based and when his comments are simply opinions. When you are the most powerful person in the United States -- and maybe in the world -- that's not a good place to be.  
1491418485	http://money.cnn.com/2017/04/05/media/pepsi-kendall-jenner-tone-deaf-ads/index.html	Pepsi and Kendall Jenner join the rogues' gallery of tone-deaf ads - Apr. 5, 2017	Kendall Jenner's ad sparks controversy Pepsi's attempt to piggyback on a social movement with the help of Kendall Jenner is only the latest tone-deaf ad to backfire miserably. The commercial, in which Jenner ditches a photo shoot to join a street protest and then gives a Pepsi to a police officer, might have been an attempt to capitalize on a message of youth and universal harmony. That's what Coca-Cola (KO) did with its iconic "Hilltop" ad in 1971, as "Mad Men" fans know. But "I'd Like to Teach the World to Sing" this was not. Pepsi pulled the ad and apologized on Wednesday after it was accused of exploiting the Black Lives Matter movement. Critics noted similarities between the ad and the famous photo of leshia Evans, a protester who peacefully faced off with Louisiana police after the fatal shooting of a black man last year. It's only the latest doozy from Pepsi (PEP). In 2013, Pepsi pulled a Mountain Dew ad that depicted a beaten and distraught white woman facing a police lineup of black suspects and a goat. Related: Pepsi pulls controversial Kendall Jenner ad And Pepsi is far from the only offender. There's a long history of ads so tone-deaf that it's hard to understand how they ever saw the light of day. -- Just Wednesday, Nivea, the German skin care company, pulled a deodorant ad that depicted a woman and the slogan "white is purity." The ad was posted on Nivea's Middle East Facebook (FB, Tech30) page. The company ran into similar trouble in 2011, when it apologized for an ad depicting a black man and the slogan "Re-civilize Yourself." -- In 2006, Sony (SNE) launched an ad campaign in the Netherlands with the slogan "PlayStation Portable White is Coming." The image featured a white model grabbing a black model by the face. Sony reportedly defended the ad, which was intended to "either highlight the whiteness of the new model or contrast the black and white models." A 2006 Sony campaign. -- A Burger King ad that appeared in Singapore in 2009 depicted a woman with her mouth open and, suggestively placed next to it, the company's BK Super Seven Incher burger. The caption said, "It just tastes better." In a YouTube video years later, the woman said she didn't know her image was being used for that ad. Burger King reportedly blamed an ad agency in Singapore. -- Bud Light bottles in 2015 sported the slogan "The perfect beer for removing 'no' from your vocabulary for the night," part of an ad campaign called Up for Whatever. Executives for the brand, which is owned by Anheuser Busch (BUDFF), later said they regretted the ad. Related: Chinese detergent ad panned for racism -- Ford (F) and the ad agency WPP apologized in 2013 for a "creative exercise" submitted for an ad competition. The artwork depicted women tied up and gagged in the back of a Ford Figo, a car available in India. Driving the car was Silvio Berlusconi, former prime minister of Italy. Ford's "creative exercise" for an ad contest fell flat for its Figo car in India. -- SpaghettiOs, a product of the Campbell Soup Company, apologized in 2013 for acknowledging Pearl Harbor Day by tweeting a cartoon of a SpaghettiOs mascot waving an American flag. "We meant to pay respect, not to offend," SpaghettiOs said in a tweet. -- DiGiorno Pizza apologized in 2014 for using the #WhyIStayed hashtag as a marketing tool without realizing that it was a reference to domestic violence. "A million apologies," tweeted DiGiorno. "Did not read what the hashtag was about before posting." -- Last year, a Chinese company called Qiaobi ran a detergent ad that showed an Asian woman shoving a black man into a laundry machine, then pulling out an Asian man, whom she seemed to prefer. Like the Pepsi-Jenner spot, it was vilified not only for being offensive, but for being offensively clueless. CNNMoney (New York) First published April 5, 2017: 12:03 PM ET
1491418328	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/05/politics/un-security-council-resolution-syria/index.html	Haley threatens 'our own action' in Syria if UN doesn't act - CNNPolitics.com	Washington (CNN)US Ambassador to the United Nations Nikki Haley strongly condemned Russia and the Syrian government Wednesday over the chemical weapons attack on civilians, suggesting that the US is open to using military action to solve the country's ongoing civil war. "When the UN consistently fails in its duty to act collectively, there are times in the life of states that we are compelled to take our own action," Haley said. "For the sake of the victims, I hope the rest of the council is finally willing to do the same." Haley, who is also the UN Security Council president, was speaking as the council considers a resolution condemning the Assad regime for the attack, which killed dozens, including many children. Russia, which backs the regime of Syrian President Bashar al-Assad and has troops in Syria, is likely to veto the resolution. "How many more children have to die before Russia cares?" Haley said, leaving her presidency chair as she displayed photos of the victims. For now, Haley's comments are the most direct threat of unilateral action by the US about acting on the Syria crisis -- but they mark a departure from the Trump administration's more hands-off stance on Syria and may be more rhetoric than reality. Trump, speaking at the White House during a visit by Jordan's King Abdullah, said Wednesday that "we see what happened just recently yesterday in Syria horrible. Horrible, horrible thing. Unspeakable." First real test for Trump in Syria Assad will be watching to see if that's the extent of Trump's response, experts say. The gas attack marks the Syrian strongman's first real test of Trump, who repeatedly criticized former President Barack Obama for getting involved in Syria. In the immediate aftermath of the gas attack, the White House released a statement blaming Obama for the tragedy. Secretary of State Rex Tillerson told a March gathering of the international coalition to defeat ISIS that "there are many pressing challenges in the Middle East, but defeating ISIS is the United States number one goal in the region." That was interpreted by many to mean that the Obama administration goal of removing Assad from power and pushing for a political solution to the Syrian war had been set aside. Indeed, during a late March visit to Turkey, Tillerson said that Assad's fate "will be decided by the Syrian people," language that Syria, Iran and Russia have used to convey their intention that the Syrian leader isn't going anywhere. The next day, White House spokesman Sean Spicer said that "with respect to Assad, there is a political reality that we have to accept in terms of where we are right now." Critics such as Arizona Republican Sen. John McCain told CNN on Wednesday that Tillerson's comment was "one of the more incredible statements I've ever heard" and that he was sure that the Assad regime was "encouraged to know that the United States is withdrawing" from the conflict. Sen. Marco Rubio, R-Florida, went a step further when he said Wednesday that he doesn't think it's a coincidence that a suspected chemical weapons attack in Syria occurred shortly after Tillerson suggested Assad could remain in power. "In this case now, we have very limited options and look, it's concerning that the secretary of state, 72 hours ago or a week ago, last Friday, said that the future's up to the people in Syria on what happens with Assad. In essence, almost nodding to the idea that Assad was going to get to stay in some capacity," Rubio said on the show "AM Tampa Bay." "I don't think it's a coincidence that a few days later we see this," Rubio concluded. Tillerson has said that the administration backs the idea of creating "interim zones of stability" within Syria where refugees could go, but he didn't offer any detail on a plan that would require defending those zones and therefore heighten the risk of military clashes with Russia. The administration could explore other options, said Daniel Serwer, director of the Conflict Management Program at Johns Hopkins University. The US could go forward with the plan to declare and defend safe areas, Serwer said. It could identify and destroy the aircraft or artillery involved in launching the chemical weapons; it could launch an air attack on the Syrian and allied ground forces advancing on opposition-controlled areas. Trump could also push Moscow to stop Syria's use of chemical weapons, he added. "So far, Donald Trump has said this cannot be ignored by the civilized world, but has done nothing," Serwer said, adding that "Trump's failure to act is a green light for Assad to do as he likes." Security Council eyes resolution Representatives from the US, United Kingdom and France have ‎circulated a draft resolution demanding that the Syrian government provide flight logs from Tuesday, the day of the attack, which killed dozens, including many children. The draft also calls for meetings with Syrian generals or other officers. The resolution explicitly condemns the use of chemical weapons within Syria and states that their use represents a threat to international peace and security. An emergency Security Council meeting was called at UN headquarters in response to the suspected targeted attack. The Syrian military under Assad has denied responsibility for the attack, claiming it would never use chemical weapons. Multiple countries denounced the attack on Wednesday before and during the Security Council hearing. Bahram Qasemi, a spokesperson for Iran's Foreign Ministry, said the country "strongly condemns" the use of chemical weapons in Syria "regardless of the perpetrators and the victims." France's UN ambassador, François Delattre, said of the attack: "That reminds us of the day of the regime's attack on Damascus. This chemical horror opens a new spiral into the abyss of the human tragedy." But Russian Foreign Ministry spokeswoman Maria Zakharova blasted the resolution, telling reporters Wednesday it was "unacceptable" and that it was drafted too quickly. The UK and Chinese ambassadors also exchanged sharp words over responsibility for UN inaction. UK Ambassador Matthew Rycroft condemned prior vetoes by China and Russia, which blocked international action on Syria. But China's Ambassador Liu Jieyi, in a rare diplomatic outburst, said the UK delegate should stop "abusing" the Security Council. CORRECTION: An earlier version of this story misquoted Haley. CNN's Bijan Hosseini and Radina Gigova contributed to this report. 
1491418254	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/04/us/lemon-oreilly-rice-twitter-cnn-tonight-cnntv/index.html	Don Lemon vs. Bill O'Reilly: Made for TV, waged on Twitter - CNN.com	(CNN)CNN's Don Lemon and FOX News' Bill O'Reilly may not go head to head on television -- O'Reilly hits cable airwaves at 8 p.m., Lemon's show begins at 10 -- but it takes more than a two-hour primetime discrepancy to keep two TV titans from squaring off on social media. On Tuesday afternoon, Lemon responded to an O'Reilly Twitter post by saying, among other things, "False." Lemon's social message was in response to an earlier tweet from the rival cable news host, one in which O'Reilly claimed Monday's edition of "CNN Tonight" failed to cover a recent story surrounding Susan Rice and alleged improper handling of national intelligence. The O'Reilly post pushed audiences to a short snippet of a Lemon segment from the previous evening, a clip featuring the anchor's pledge to not "aid and abet" those trying to misinform the American people through claims that Donald Trump or his team had been surveilled, or spied upon. Though the video was paired with a description suggesting Lemon had "declared his show a Rice-free zone," content from the program suggests otherwise. As promised off the top, Lemon and an assortment of expert guests devoted a wide swath of television time to Rice and the day's claims that President Obama's former national security adviser had used government secrets to push a political agenda. Rice has since vehemently denied the Trump administrations accusations.  
1491419097	http://money.cnn.com/2017/04/05/technology/police-body-camera-taser-international-axon/index.html	Axon offers body cameras for every police officer in the U.S. - Apr. 5, 2017	What you should know about police body-worn cameras An Arizona-based company just offered to equip every police officer in the United States with a body camera for one year. Axon (TASR) -- formerly known as Taser International -- said Wednesday that it will also provide police departments with all the hardware, data storage and training they need to use the devices. At the end of one year, police departments can choose to purchase the devices and docking stations, which cost $400 and $200, respectively, or return them to Axon. If they keep the devices, they'll also pay roughly $80 a month per camera for data storage. Related: Two police officers get real on body cameras All that will be free for the first year. And Axon founder and CEO Rick Smith said he expects the the body cameras will make it easier for officers to do their jobs, and will "drive important social change." "[The cameras] hold the potential to change police work as we know it, by seamlessly collecting an impartial record and reducing the need for endless paperwork. That's why we're giving this opportunity to every single police officer in America," Smith said. Related: Gun and body camera stocks surge after Dallas shooting Axon said the decision was inspired in part by a Pew Research Center study that found policing is more difficult today than ever before. "Cameras are the first of many steps toward a future where officers feel more confident and are freed from mundane report-writing to focus more time on community policing," Smith said. The company also announced Wednesday its decision to change its name to Axon, ditching "Taser International," as part of an expansion into new products. CNNMoney (New York) First published April 5, 2017: 2:29 PM ET
1491418945	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/05/politics/trump-susan-rice/index.html	Donald Trump says Susan Rice broke the law. His evidence? Nothing. - CNNPolitics.com	Washington (CNN)President Donald Trump made a big accusation on Wednesday in an interview with the New York Times: Former Obama Administration national security adviser Susan Rice likely broke the law in requesting the names of Trump campaign officials caught up in the broader surveillance of Russian officials seeking to meddle in the 2016 election. "Do I think? Yes, I think," Trump told the Times, when asked whether Rice committed a crime. Big stuff, right? The President of the United States accusing the top national security adviser in his predecessor's administration of breaking the law! Trump must have some pretty conclusive evidence to make such a charge, right? Right?! Wrong. Or, at least, not proven -- or anything close. When pressed for evidence to back up his claim, Trump offered none -- instead doing what he often does in these sorts of situations: Promising that all will be revealed at some indeterminate time in the near(ish) future. Trump promised he would reveal the evidence to back up his explosive claim "at the right time" in the Times interview. He offered no further guidance of what that "right time" might be or if it ever will come. It is of course possible that Trump really does have evidence that justifies his claims about being wire-tapped and/or about alleged criminal activity by Rice. He is the president, after all, and is likely exposed to lots of information that the rest of us aren't. But the burden of proof for these allegations lies squarely on Trump because, well, everyone else in a position to know simply isn't saying the sort of things he is. A top national security official asking for the unmasking of a American citizen caught up in the incidental collection of surveillance data is not a crime. In fact, according to most national security experts, it's a routine measure often designed to assess the seriousness of a situation or a threat. Leaking such information would be a crime -- and seems to be where Trump was headed in the Times interview. But, Rice publicly denied that she did any sort of leaking of classified information in an interview with NBC's Andrea Mitchell on Tuesday. "I leaked nothing to nobody, and never have and never would," she said. In the face of such a categorical denial, it's incumbent on Trump to come forward with his promised evidence that led him to conclude Rice committed a crime. If the former national security adviser is lying about leaking classified information to the media regarding top staffers to the Trump campaign, that's something the public needs to know about -- and authorities need to act on -- immediately. The alternative explanation is that Trump is simply making an allegation without any clear and indisputable evidence to back it up. Given what we know of the initial Trump wire-tapping allegation, it's hard to rule that out as a possibility. Trump has never come forward with even a scintilla of evidence that what he claims about Obama ordered the wiretap are true. Instead he and his allies have sought to muddy the rhetorical waters regarding what the definition of "wire-tapping" actually is. The implications of that explanation are serious and concerning. If the President of the United States is willing to freelance like that with no evidence to back him up, it makes it hard to know when he is speaking from a position that is fact-based and when his comments are simply opinions. When you are the most powerful person in the United States -- and maybe in the world -- that's not a good place to be.  
1491418893	http://www.cnn.com/2012/04/27/travel/hawaii-travel-tips/index.html	Hawaii travel tips: What to do -- and what to avoid - CNN.com	(CNN)Looking to get to Hawaii without blowing your child's college fund? Want to experience the islands but not sure when to go? Here's how to avoid costly and exhausting mistakes during your Hawaiian vacation. Don't travel to Hawaii during school holidays. Tourists crowd Hawaii's stunning beaches in summer and winter. During school holidays, flight and hotel rates are off the charts -- between Christmas and New Years, condos and vacation rentals can run three times as much as rates in early December. Do visit Hawaii in the off-season. Hands down the best values on visiting Hawaii can be found in May and October. With prices reasonably low and the weather at its peak -- not too hot, not too rainy -- take advantage of the perks of off-season travel to jet off to the islands. Current spring and fall flight deals from the West Coast are half of July rates. Additionally, hotels and condos generally slash their prices off-season, rewarding visitors with oceanfront accommodations that typically sell out in peak months. Honolulu: Insider Travel Guide Don't blow your whole budget on a luxury resort. While staying in a luxurious Hawaiian resort where birds flutter through the open-air lobby and fresh papaya is served at the swim-up bar is nice, it is likely to cost between $400-$600 a night in high season. Instead, fork over the cash for a lomilomi massage and gourmet seafood dinner, and make your own poolside Mai Tai at a rental condo. Do consider staying in a condo. Repeat visitors know to rent a condo. Kitchens, ample square footage, washing machines and privacy afford travelers a more authentic (and often less costly) vacation experience. It's common for numerous companies to manage individual units in the same complex, meaning one property may be decked out by a globetrotting interior decorator, while another may be awash in wicker. Be sure to see photos of the particular condo you're interested in and get specifics on the number and configuration of beds. Photos: Hawaii's best beach bars Don't try to see everything. While each island has its own personality, it is too expensive (and exhausting) to island-hop the entire archipelago on one vacation. Inter-island flights generally run between $70-$140 each way and most travel to Oahu, so if you want to get from Kauai to the Big Island, you might have to stop in Honolulu and basically pay the equivalent of two inter-island flights each way. Do stick to one or two islands. Each region on each island has its own flavor. The north and east sides of the islands are more tropical, while the south and west regions offer sunnier skies and a more arid landscape. Instead of island hopping, break your trip up by staying in a plush hotel within walking distance of a sunny south shore beach and then cozy up in a rental house near the more tropical (read: rainy) north shore. If you want to island-hop on the cheap, Maui offers ferry service to Lanai and Molokai. Photos show the 'real Hawaii' beyond the tourist spots in Oahu Don't fall for the luau. Most luaus are overpriced and far from the real thing (usually family events on a beach for a first birthday). While they seem like an authentic experience, you can actually piece together the highlights of a luau yourself. Grab a picnic of poke, lomi lomi, fresh pineapple, and poi from a local market. In the evenings at most malls on Kauai and Maui, and at sunset at Waikiki Beach, you can watch free hula shows featuring some of Hawaii's best dancers. Do splurge on an adventure. Whether you fancy diving deep into the sea, soaring over waterfalls on a helicopter tour, or a kayak trip along the Na Pali Coast, treat yourself to at least one adventure. Be sure to book early in your trip in case of bad weather. In Moloka'i, Anthony Bourdain finds his Hawaiian paradise And lastly, do not forget to relax on the beach. No need to be on a boat, or a horse, or a helicopter, or a zip line the whole time. Save time to enjoy Hawaii's world-class beaches. From the shore, you can walk right out into the sea and snorkel with sea turtles, angelfish and monk seals basically for free. As the sun descends over the Pacific, unwind under a coconut palm and watch the sky burst with color as surfers ride the last sunlit waves onto the white sand. Michele Bigley is the author of "Great Destinations, Kauai" (Countryman Press) and the upcoming "Backroads and Byways of Hawaii" (Countryman Press).  This article was originally published in May 2012. A South Pacific Island for every taste 5 quiet U.S. coastal towns that offer a seaside escape  
1491418831	http://money.cnn.com/2017/04/05/technology/youtube-launches-tv-streaming/index.html	YouTube's streaming TV service is finally live - Apr. 5, 2017	YouTube CEO: We're reaching more viewers than TV YouTube TV is here. Google's (GOOGL, Tech30) YouTube officially launched its new live TV streaming service, YouTube TV, on Wednesday. The $35-per-month service is available in New York, Los Angeles, the San Francisco Bay Area, Chicago and Philadelphia to start with. The company says it will be adding more cities soon. The service is targeted at those who don't want to pay for traditional cable packages. YouTube says its service is less than half the cost of an average cable subscription and can be canceled at any time. Related: NFL partners with Amazon to stream games this season The bundle includes shows from the major networks, as well as Bravo, FX, ESPN and Fox Sports. Users can also watch shows previously only accessible on YouTube Red, the company's ad-free subscription service, which also has original series and movies. Google said that AMC, BBC America, IFC, Sundance TV, WE tv and BBC World News will soon be included in the service as well. You can watch YouTube TV on your TV, phone, tablet or computer. It also has a cloud DVR with no storage limits and six accounts are included with the service. Related: YouTube launches streaming TV service YouTube TV will compete with other streaming TV services like Sling TV and AT&T's (T, Tech30) DirectTV Now. In February, YouTube CEO Susan Wojcicki‏ said consumers around the world watch one billion hours of YouTube every day and younger people don't want to watch TV through traditional channels. CNNMoney (New York) First published April 5, 2017: 3:00 PM ET
1491418828	http://money.cnn.com/2017/04/05/media/donald-trump-defends-bill-oreilly/index.html	Trump defends Bill O'Reilly: 'I don't think Bill did anything wrong' - Apr. 5, 2017	Lisa Bloom wants Fox News investigated President Donald Trump on Wednesday weighed in on the recent controversy surrounding Fox News host Bill O'Reilly. In an interview with The New York Times, Trump defended O'Reilly against new revelations that he, Fox News and parent company 21st Century Fox had paid a total of $13 million in settlements to five women who accused him of sexual harassment or verbal abuse. "I think he's a person I know well — he is a good person," Trump told the Times. "I think he shouldn't have settled; personally I think he shouldn't have settled. Because you should have taken it all the way. I don't think Bill did anything wrong." O'Reilly has denied the merits of all the claims against him, 21st Century Fox said in a statement. Trump had his own run-in with sexual harassment accusations last October, after an Access Hollywood tape surfaced in which he said he grabbed women by their genitals. "I don't even wait," Trump can be heard saying in the tape. "And when you're a star, they let you do it, you can do anything." Last week, Trump declared April 2017 National Sexual Assault Awareness and Prevention Month, pledging that his administration "will do everything in its power to protect women, children, and men from sexual violence." Trump's defense of O'Reilly was similar to his defense of former Fox News chief Roger Ailes last year, when Ailes was facing a litany of sexual harassment allegations. "I think they are unfounded just based on what I've read," Trump said of the accusations against Ailes. "Totally unfounded, based on what I read." Ailes, who has denied all of the allegations against him, was forced to resign from Fox News just one week after that interview. Related: Read what 'O'Reilly Factor' advertisers are saying Nine months after Ailes' departure, Fox News is facing mounting public pressure from accusers, advertisers and women's rights groups to go further in addressing the allegations against O'Reilly. More than 20 companies had pulled their advertising from "The O'Reilly Factor" as of Wednesday. Lisa Bloom, the lawyer for one of O'Reilly's accusers, has called for an independent investigation of Fox News. The National Organization for Women has called for him to be fired. Meanwhile, many female employees inside Fox News are too scared to speak out about problems in the workplace, fearing that they have no leverage against powerful on-air talents like O'Reilly, current and former network sources have told CNNMoney. Related: At Fox News, fear and silence amid O'Reilly controversy 21st Century Fox and Fox News are standing behind O'Reilly. But neither the company nor O'Reilly have addressed the matter since Saturday, when the New York Times first revealed the extent of settlements paid to O'Reilly's accusers. Henry Holt, the publisher of O'Reilly's new book "Old School," has said it has "no comment at this time" on the allegations against its author. 21st Century Fox is also under federal investigation over its handling of payments made to women who accused Ailes of sexual harassment. CNNMoney (New York) First published April 5, 2017: 1:03 PM ET
1491419849	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/05/app-news-section/quickly-catch-up-april-5-trnd/index.html	Quickly catch up: Wednesday, April 5 - CNN.com	(CNN)Here's what you might have missed on CNN today: -- President Trump, in response to a question on the chemical attack in Syria, said, "I now have responsibility" for a policy regarding the country. -- Meanwhile, international condemnation mounted over the apparent targeted chemical attack. Russia's claims that a regime airstrike on a "terrorist" ammunition depot was behind the attack were rejected. -- Steve Bannon was removed from his National Security Council role. -- Trump defended Bill O'Reilly in an interview with The New York Times, saying, "I don't think Bill did anything wrong." -- An F-16 crashed near Joint Base Andrews in Maryland. -- The United States may add airports to the electronics ban. -- Pepsi pulled its controversial Kendall Jenner ad. -- Another teen was accepted by all eight Ivy League schools.  
1491419765	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/05/europe/men-holding-hands-netherlands/index.html	Dutch men are holding hands in solidarity with gay couple - CNN.com	(CNN)Men all over the world are standing up to homophobia by holding hands. From New York to London, and from Canberra to Amsterdam, famous figures and ordinary Dutch citizens have been posting images of themselves on social media with the hashtag #allemannenhandinhand (all men, holding hands). The trend was sparked by reports of a gang attack on a gay couple, Jasper Vernes-Sewratan, 35, and Ronnie Sewratan-Vernes, 31, in Arnhem, a city in the east of the Netherlands, in the early hours of Sunday morning. According to a police statement, the men were attacked by a group of young people armed with bolt cutters. Two suspects were taken into custody and four others later reported to the police station in connection with the attack. Vernes-Sewratan's Facebook post about the incident, which he describes as a hate crime, has been shared more than 7,500 times and he has received thousands of supportive comments. The hashtag in support of the couple was inspired by Barbara Barend, founder of a Dutch magazine, who tweeted Sunday, "Can this whole week all men (straight and gay) please just walk hand in hand ..." Politicians, sportsmen, actors, policemen and businessmen have all responded to the call. Deputy Prime Minister of the Netherlands Lodewijk Asscher posted this picture of himself holding hands with fellow Labour Party politician Jeroen Dijsselbloem with the hashtag #allemannenhandinhand. Since then, workers at the Dutch Embassies in London and Canberra and at the United Nations in New York have joined the campaign. Staff at Amsterdam's Academic Medical Center posted this Instagram photo... ...while footballers from a club in the city of Nijmegen, just south of Arnhem, shared this image. "NEC turns its back on anti-gay violence," the post says. Rotterdam's police also got involved, as did two religious leaders, David van Veen and Erick Versloot, in Waarder, south of Amsterdam. The hashtag is still gaining momentum, with people of all nationalities posting, sharing and tagging images of men holding hands. Although the Netherlands was the first country in the world to legalize gay marriage, in 2001, activists say it is not yet free of homophobia. Philip Tijsma, public affairs manager at COC Nederland, an organization that supports the LGBT community, reflected on the situation in his country in 2015, shortly after the US Supreme Court ruled in favor of same-sex marriage. "While some may think of the Netherlands as some sort of 'gay paradise,' the truth is that the layer of acceptance in this country is thinner than many people think," he said. "About 7 in 10 LGBT people say they have been confronted with physical and/or verbal violence because of their identity," Tijsma said. "Plus, many LGBT students have a difficult time in high school, are bullied and see suicide rates that are almost five times higher than average." "The fight for equality continues."  
1491419759	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/05/us/nd-teen-ivy-league-trnd/index.html	Martin Altenburg: ND teen gets into all 8 Ivy League schools - CNN.com	(CNN)Another brilliant student has joined an exclusive academic club -- and now that teen in New Jersey won't be the only one agonizing over which Ivy League school to choose this fall. A student in North Dakota has the same decision to make. Martin Altenburg, a high school senior in Fargo, was also accepted into all eight Ivy League schools. "I wanted to just apply to as many schools as possible because ... I wasn't sure where I'd get in and where I wouldn't get in," Altenburg told CNN affiliate WDAY. Well, that strategy obviously worked because Altenburg will now choose between Harvard, Yale, Cornell, Columbia, the University of Pennsylvania, Princeton, Dartmouth and Brown. "Yale was the last letter I opened," he said. "And I was like, 'OK, if I get into this, I've gotten into all eight Ivy Leagues.'" But that's not all. He was also accepted at Stanford and MIT. Busy schedule reaps rewards As busy a schedule as Altenburg keeps, its amazing he even had time to fill out all of those college applications. He told WDAY at school he's involved in cross-country. And swimming. And track. And orchestra. And chamber orchestra. And youth symphony. He's the district lieutenant governor for Key Club. And he runs a Twitter account for his calculator. No really. Altenburg, who is a student at Fargo North High School, hasn't made his decision yet, but he's leaning toward Princeton, Stanford, Harvard or MIT. Students getting into all of the Ivies is a monumental feat that few achieve. Just this week Ifeoma White-Thorpe of New Jersey said she got acceptance letters from all eight schools. And over the past couple of years four other students -- Kwasi Enin in 2014, Harold Ekeh in 2015 and Augusta Uwamanzu-Nna and Kelly Hyles last year -- also joined this exclusive club.  
1491419563	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/05/entertainment/shia-labeouf-man-down-ticket/index.html	Shia LaBeouf film sells one ticket in U.K. - CNN.com	(CNN)Will the one person who purchased a ticket to see Shia LaBeouf's new war movie please step forward? "Man Down" opened in the UK this weekend, and Variety reported that only one ticket was purchased. The film screened at a single theater, Reel Cinema in Burnley, England, and according to the cross platform measurement company ComScore, raked in £7, or about $8.70. "Man Down" was also released on demand at the same time and will be out on DVD and Blu-ray next month. The film stars LaBeouf as a Marine who searches for his estranged son after returning from a tour of Afghanistan. It was released in limited theaters stateside in December 2016.  
1491420468	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/05/politics/democrats-trump-tax-return/index.html	Pelosi, Dems not letting go of Trump tax return push - CNNPolitics.com	Washington (CNN)Democrats' aren't letting go of their push to highlight how President Donald Trump hasn't released his tax returns. House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi and other Democrats argued their case for a discharge petition Wednesday, a process by which legislation can skip committee and move straight to the House floor if a majority of the House supports it. If passed, the legislation would require Trump and any presidents after him to release their tax returns going forward. Democratic Rep. Anna Eshoo of California proposed the petition, which needs 218 signatures to pass and thus would require the support of more than 20 Republican members in addition to every Democrat -- an extremely tall order for the hyperpartisan status of Congress. But Richard Neal, a Democrat from Massachusetts and ranking member on the House Ways and Means Committee, said the petition has bipartisan interest. "It's not partisan," Neal said. "If Barack Obama or Bill Clinton did not release their tax returns, there would've been a storm on the side demanding those tax returns." RELATED: President Trump today: Live updates Trump has in the past promised to release his tax returns upon conclusion of an audit into his finances, but the White House has not specified when that would be. When MSNBC's Rachel Maddow said she had gotten her hands on a summary of Trump's 2005 tax returns, the White House confirmed Trump made more than $150 million and had paid $38 million in taxes. More recently, Trump aides have suggested that since he won the election, he would not release his returns. Pelosi, a California Democrat, said Trump's choices on foreign policy and trade relations could be impacted by his business connections to foreign governments, such as Russia and China. Such a problem has prompted an interest among Democrats to gain clarity on Trump's business ties overseas. "It's the President of the United States. There is a question about a Russia connection — politically, financially, personally," Pelosi said, referring to Russia's role in the 2016 campaign. "It isn't as if the tax returns tell the whole story, but they are a key that opens the door to so much information." RELATED: Trump meets with 'Putin's favorite congressman' as Russia story swirls Pelosi also said that Trump's refusal to release his tax returns has reflected badly on his Republican defenders. "He holds himself to very low standards. And he's making a fool of his friends," she said. RELATED: White House: Trump paid $38 million in income tax in 2015  
1491420453	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/05/world/iyw-syria-resource-list-2/index.html	Help Syrians survive the conflict - CNN.com	(CNN)As Syria enters its seventh year of civil war, "the need for humanitarian aid and the protection of Syrian civilians has never been greater," according to UN Secretary-General Antonio Guterres. Tuesday, the country faced another crisis -- a chemical attack that killed at least 70 people, including 10 children. Since the war began in 2011, an estimated 400,000 Syrians have died. The fighting has also cost the country more than $16 billion of lost crop and livestock production and destroyed farming assets according to the UN. No matter where you live, there are ways you can help the Syrian people with food, shelter, medical aid and other basic needs. Simply click the button below and support organizations aiding those in crisis.  
1491420305	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/05/politics/un-security-council-resolution-syria/index.html	Haley threatens 'our own action' in Syria if UN doesn't act - CNNPolitics.com	Washington (CNN)US Ambassador to the United Nations Nikki Haley strongly condemned Russia and the Syrian government Wednesday over the chemical weapons attack on civilians, suggesting that the US is open to using military action to solve the country's ongoing civil war. "When the United Nations consistently fails in its duty to act collectively, there are times in the life of states that we are compelled to take our own action," Haley said. "For the sake of the victims, I hope the rest of the council is finally willing to do the same." Haley, who is also the UN Security Council president, was speaking as the council considers a resolution condemning the Assad regime for the attack, which killed dozens, including many children. Russia, which backs the regime of Syrian President Bashar al-Assad and has troops in Syria, is likely to veto the resolution. "How many more children have to die before Russia cares?" Haley said, leaving her presidency chair as she displayed photos of the victims. For now, Haley's comments are the most direct threat of unilateral action by the US about acting on the Syria crisis -- but they mark a departure from the Trump administration's more hands-off stance on Syria and may be more rhetoric than reality. Trump, speaking at the White House during a visit by Jordan's King Abdullah, said Wednesday that "we see what happened just recently yesterday in Syria horrible. Horrible, horrible thing. Unspeakable." First real test for Trump in Syria Assad will be watching to see if that's the extent of Trump's response, experts say. The gas attack marks the Syrian strongman's first real test of Trump, who repeatedly criticized former President Barack Obama for getting involved in Syria. In the immediate aftermath of the gas attack, the White House released a statement blaming Obama for the tragedy. Secretary of State Rex Tillerson told a March gathering of the international coalition to defeat ISIS that "there are many pressing challenges in the Middle East, but defeating ISIS is the United States number one goal in the region." That was interpreted by many to mean that the Obama administration goal of removing Assad from power and pushing for a political solution to the Syrian war had been set aside. Indeed, during a late March visit to Turkey, Tillerson said that Assad's fate "will be decided by the Syrian people," language that Syria, Iran and Russia have used to convey their intention that the Syrian leader isn't going anywhere. The next day, White House spokesman Sean Spicer said that "with respect to Assad, there is a political reality that we have to accept in terms of where we are right now." Critics such as Arizona Republican Sen. John McCain told CNN on Wednesday that Tillerson's comment was "one of the more incredible statements I've ever heard" and that he was sure that the Assad regime was "encouraged to know that the United States is withdrawing" from the conflict. Sen. Marco Rubio, R-Florida, went a step further when he said Wednesday that he doesn't think it's a coincidence that a suspected chemical weapons attack in Syria occurred shortly after Tillerson suggested Assad could remain in power. "In this case now, we have very limited options and look, it's concerning that the secretary of state, 72 hours ago or a week ago, last Friday, said that the future's up to the people in Syria on what happens with Assad. In essence, almost nodding to the idea that Assad was going to get to stay in some capacity," Rubio said on the show "AM Tampa Bay." "I don't think it's a coincidence that a few days later we see this," Rubio concluded. Tillerson has said that the administration backs the idea of creating "interim zones of stability" within Syria where refugees could go, but he didn't offer any detail on a plan that would require defending those zones and therefore heighten the risk of military clashes with Russia. The administration could explore other options, said Daniel Serwer, director of the Conflict Management Program at Johns Hopkins University. The US could go forward with the plan to declare and defend safe areas, Serwer said. It could identify and destroy the aircraft or artillery involved in launching the chemical weapons; it could launch an air attack on the Syrian and allied ground forces advancing on opposition-controlled areas. Trump could also push Moscow to stop Syria's use of chemical weapons, he added. "So far, Donald Trump has said this cannot be ignored by the civilized world, but has done nothing," Serwer said, adding that "Trump's failure to act is a green light for Assad to do as he likes." Security Council eyes resolution Representatives from the US, United Kingdom and France have ‎circulated a draft resolution demanding that the Syrian government provide flight logs from Tuesday, the day of the attack, which killed dozens, including many children. The draft also calls for meetings with Syrian generals or other officers. The resolution explicitly condemns the use of chemical weapons within Syria and states that their use represents a threat to international peace and security. An emergency Security Council meeting was called at UN headquarters in response to the suspected targeted attack. The Syrian military under Assad has denied responsibility for the attack, claiming it would never use chemical weapons. Multiple countries denounced the attack on Wednesday before and during the Security Council hearing. Bahram Qasemi, a spokesperson for Iran's Foreign Ministry, said the country "strongly condemns" the use of chemical weapons in Syria "regardless of the perpetrators and the victims." France's UN ambassador, François Delattre, said of the attack: "That reminds us of the day of the regime's attack on Damascus. This chemical horror opens a new spiral into the abyss of the human tragedy." But Russian Foreign Ministry spokeswoman Maria Zakharova blasted the resolution, telling reporters Wednesday it was "unacceptable" and that it was drafted too quickly. The UK and Chinese ambassadors also exchanged sharp words over responsibility for UN inaction. UK Ambassador Matthew Rycroft condemned prior vetoes by China and Russia, which blocked international action on Syria. But China's Ambassador Liu Jieyi, in a rare diplomatic outburst, said the UK delegate should stop "abusing" the Security Council. CORRECTION: An earlier version of this story misquoted Haley. CNN's Bijan Hosseini and Radina Gigova contributed to this report. 
1491420237	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/05/politics/king-abdullah-donald-trump-jordan/index.html	Abdullah and Trump: United against ISIS, divided on refugees - CNNPolitics.com	Washington (CNN)When King Abdullah II of Jordan was presented with a wave of refugees from Syria, he welcomed more than a million people into his country. When President Donald Trump was presented the same, he closed the door. The two world leaders who met Wednesday are united in the fight against ISIS -- a fact Trump heralded during a news conference in the White House Rose Garden -- but the duo are each other's antithesis when it comes to responding to the now ever-present issue of Syrian refugees. The meeting comes as the focus on Syria's ongoing civil war is at its brightest: The White House, along with activist groups and other foreign leaders, blamed forces tied to Syrian President Bashar al-Assad on Tuesday for a chemical attack in a rebel-controlled area of Syria. On Wednesday, Abdullah downplayed his differences with Trump regarding refugees, largely deflecting a question about Trump's refugee ban. And Trump pledged to help Jordan with strains caused by the influx of refugees looking to escape Syria. "We also acknowledged the vital role that Jordan has played in hosting refugees from the conflict in Syria," Trump said, adding that the United States will contribute more aide to Jordan for refugees. "This aid will help countries like Jordan host refugees until it is safe for them to return home," Trump said. "The refugees want to return home." Abdullah echoed this sentiment: "Most, if not all, Syrian refugees want to go back to Syria." Pictures of children writhing in pain from the attack have plastered TVs around the world, bringing into focus the human impact the ongoing war. White House officials said this week that Middle East peace and the refugee crisis will be among the topics the two world leaders will discuss Wednesday. Trump said Wednesday that the chemical attack "crossed a lot of lines" for him and changed his "attitude towards Syria and Assad has changed very much." The official White House visit is the second time Abdullah and Trump have seen each other this year. The two met briefly in February around an annual Washington prayer breakfast. Abdullah also met with Vice President Mike Pence in February to discuss the fight against terrorism and the Syrian crisis, according to the White House. But Wednesday's put a sharper focus on the differences between the two world leaders, especially in terms of the ongoing refugee issue that has put pressure on Jordan's economy. Jordan and the refugees The Syrian civil war has caused 4.81 million Syrians to flee their country, according to the United Nations, while 6.3 million people have been displaced internally. Jordan's response to the crisis was to take in over million refugees, the country's leaders have said, a decision that dramatically altered the make-up of the oil-less Middle Eastern country that shares a 233-mile border with Syria. The United Nations has registered close to 700,000 refugees in Jordan alone. "We really didn't have much choice," Abdullah told CBS in 2016. "They were flooding across the border, being shot by the Syrian regime and Jordan has always been a place that opens its arms to refugees from many countries unfortunately." The decision has increased Jordan's population by 20%, Abdullah said, straining the country's ability provide basic necessities, like water, to the refugees, while at the same time decreasing the services Jordanian citizens have received from their government. "Jordan is fatigued and has reached its maximum carrying capacity whether in terms of available resources," Jordanian Prime Minister Hani al-Mulki said Tuesday. "Without the continued support of the international community this will negatively impact our overstretched ability to continue providing necessary services to Syrians." Despite the troubles, though, Abdullah's decision stands in stark contrast with Trump, who -- days after assuming office in January -- directed his administration to shut the door on Syrian refugees. "I'm establishing new vetting measures to keep radical Islamic terrorists out of the United States of America. We don't want them here," Trump said as he signed the order. "We only want to admit those into our country who will support our country and love deeply our people." While that order -- and a subsequent order that looked to do something similar -- have been blocked by courts, the Trump administration has made clear that Syrian refugees will not be welcome without a pause in the program. Trump capped his presidential campaign by routinely promising to "suspend" the Syrian refugee program and slammed Hillary Clinton, his 2016 opponent, for advocating the United States increase the number of Syrian refugees they accept. "Hillary Clinton wants a 550% increase in Syrian refugees pouring into our countries," Trump said days before the election in Florida. "Her plan would mean generations of terrorism and extremism spreading in your schools and all throughout your communities." United against ISIS One area on which Trump and Abdullah do agree is the fight against ISIS, where both world leaders are supportive of going after the terrorist organization. Abdullah, a former special operations commander in Jordan, told CNN in 2015 that while ISIS is trying to link itself to Islam, "These people... are on the fringe of Islam." And he has cracked down violently on the group. When ISIS captured Jordanian pilot Moaz al-Kasasbeh in 2015 and killed him by putting him inside a cage and setting it on fire with a flamethrower, Abdullah responded by hanging two prisoners, including one that ISIS had previously requested be released. Jordan has also played a key role in the campaign against ISIS, regularly participating in air attacks against the group and sharing intelligence with the CIA and other American organizations. Trump campaigned on a platform of tough talk on ISIS, including pledging to "bomb the hell" out of the group. "I will quickly and decisively bomb the hell out of ISIS, will rebuild our military and make it so strong no-one -- and I mean, no one -- will mess with us," he said in a radio ad during the campaign. Trump heralded Abdullah as "a great warrior" who has been key in the fight against ISIS. And Abdullah said the fight against terror "has no borders, no nationality, no religion." "We are very encouraged with the president's determination to support Arab and Muslim states in their fight against terrorism," he added.  
1491420202	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/05/politics/steve-bannon-national-security-council/index.html	What Steve Bannon's demotion tells us about the Trump White House - CNNPolitics.com	Washington (CNN)President Trump's decision to remove chief strategist Steve Bannon from the National Security Council's principals committee suggests a potentially significant change in the power balance among the four top White House advisers. Bannon's placement on the principals committee at the start of the Trump administration drew criticism not only from Democrats but also from many Republicans and prominent members of the intelligence community. The idea that Bannon, who, prior to his hiring as the chief political strategist to Trump's campaign, had been the CEO of a conservative news website, would sit on a committee typically reserved only for the upper echelon of the military, raised questions about the scope of his influence within the White House. It was part of a broader ascension of Bannon within the West Wing; he was widely regarded in the early days of the administration as a first among equals in a group that included chief of staff Reince Priebus, counselor Kellyanne Conway and son-in-law Jared Kushner. That ascension has clearly faltered. The removal of Bannon from the NSC comes in the wake of a series of other moves -- most notably the arrival of Trump's daughter, Ivanka, in the West Wing -- that suggest that the president is moving away (at least for the moment) from the more hard-line ideological bent of Bannon. "I always believed Steve would be first senior adviser to leave the White House," said one former Trump aide granted anonymity to speak candidly. "He's an ideologue. Trump is not. He has to get frustrated." The Trump White House sought to spin the Bannon decision not as a demotion but rather a natural conclusion to his initial appointment to the principals committee. But, that doesn't really check out. If Bannon's position on the NSC was always meant to be temporary why not say that from the outset? It's hard not to see the Bannon move in the broader context of Trump's first 75 days in office, which have been, to put it mildly, chaotic. The attempt to overhaul the Affordable Care Act ended before it ever started, an 18-day debacle that showed that Trump's challenges within his own party were far larger than he seemed to believe. He continues to labor under a self-inflicted controversy regarding his unproven allegation that President Obama wiretapped him during the 2016 campaign. The numerous ties between senior campaign aides and Russian intelligence officials -- as well as the ongoing Justice Department investigation into these ties -- show no signs of being knocked off front pages. All of it has created a toxic political environment for Trump. His approval rating in Gallup's daily tracking poll is mired in the mid 30s; it's at 37% in the three-day rolling average today. That marks a historic low for a president so new to the office. The lowest approval number Gallup measured for Obama in his first year was 49% in November 2009. For George W. Bush it was 51% in September 2001. While Trump -- like all politicians -- is loathe to admit a change of direction is needed or that mistakes have been made, it's hard to look at his current position and conclude anything else. To be clear: Bannon will remain in the White House -- and in a senior role. But the diminution of his power -- and in such a public way -- is a clear sign that a shakeup in the Trump power structure is under way. Trump, of course, is mercurial. Bannon may have fallen out of favor -- for now. But, almost nothing is set in stone in the world of Donald Trump so in a month or two we could be talking about Bannon's reassertion of primacy in the Trump orbit. But, that's not the story today.  
1491420059	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/01/us/florida-burmese-python-hunt/index.html	Florida snake hunt ignites 'python fever' - CNN.com	Homestead, Florida (CNN)Donna Kalil couldn't hear a python slithering in the grass with the wind blowing. But spotting a tunnel-shaped snake trail, she disappeared into the cattails hunting for one. The Kendall, Florida, resident carried a stick. A knife and 9 mm handgun were attached to her belt. A real estate investor-turned-amateur python hunter, she spotted a ribbon snake clinging to a leaf. She hoped it was a harbinger of success in her quest to find a Burmese python in the Florida Everglades. Kalil, 54, was among a group of python hunters Thursday working to rid Everglades National Park and surrounding areas of the non-native species of pythons that prey on wildlife. The 25 hunters selected from 1,000 applicants will be paid to euthanize pythons under a $175,000 pilot program by the South Florida Water Management District. The two-month hunt ends June 1. The district hopes the hunters kill many pythons. But if Kalil finds a python, it would be the first snake she will have ever killed. "I'm not really happy about it," she said. So, what's a python hunter to do? Hunters the best solution The pilot program follows python challenges run by another agency that led to the capture and killing of more than 174 Burmese pythons across Florida in monthlong competitions in 2013 and 2016. Hunters from the Irula tribe in India also separately caught many pythons. The Burmese python is native to Southeast Asia. It was first discovered in the Everglades in the late 1970s and began appearing on water management district land in 2005, said LeRoy Rodgers, an invasive species biologist with the water management district. The snakes, which have no natural predators in the region, were likely introduced into the Everglades after a significant release, he said. That release was either accidental or intentional, University of Florida researchers say. The Everglades, known as the river of grass, is a vast area with a climate perfect for the pythons to hide and thrive. There are no precise population figures, but there are believed to be thousands living in the ecosystem in Miami-Dade County, Rodgers said. A 2012 study by Virginia Tech University, Davidson College and the US Geological Survey found that pythons caused the populations of rabbits and foxes to vanish and the numbers of raccoons, opossums and bobcats to drop by as much as 99% in the Everglades. The giant constrictors have also been discovered farther north in Broward and Palm Beach counties. The water district has tried to cull the population in a several ways, including dedicating a staff member to hunting the pythons since 2006, Rodgers said. "We really haven't found any tool that works better than human hunters going out in the field looking for them," he said of the snakes that can grow to about 17 feet long and weigh up to 150 pounds. Not in it for the money The water district program will pay $8.10 an hour for up to eight hours of hunting a day. A python measuring 4 feet fetches an additional $50. Each additional foot will draw $25 more. Hunters can make an extra $100 if they kill a python guarding a nest. Kalil planned to use her earnings for gas money and to buy gadgets for python hunting such as a drone and spotlights for her sport utility vehicle. But she's not in it for the money, she said. "It's about getting out there and trying to make a difference to the wildlife that we find," she said. Kalil wore camouflage pants and rain boots. A slender woman, she hoped the Velcro wrapped around a wooden stick from Venezuela used to herd cattle would give her an edge. "Maybe he'll grab a hold of that and get stuck," she said. "And then I could grab him." Kalil would then hit the snake over the head and stab it in the brain, as if she were spearfishing. Reliving a childhood playing in the woods She walked over sunbaked rocks, crouched and crawled through hardwood hammocks. She poked the brush and thrusted the stick in holes in tree trunks. She marveled at a black swallowtail butterfly and an endangered American crocodile in brackish water. "This is reliving my childhood. I used to live in the woods as a kid," she said. "After school, I'd just come and climb through the hardwood hammock. This is my favorite ecosystem." Kalil grew up in northern Miami in a family of Air Force veterans. She admired her brothers -- "all-out boys, running around trying to catch stuff" -- and wanted to be like them, she said. She recalled playing with their venomous tigra mariposa as a child when her father was stationed in Caracas, Venezuela. Her panicked nanny saw her with the reptile and pummeled the snake. "The image is, unfortunately, seared in my memory. I felt sorry for the little guys since then," she said. Her brothers taught her how to hunt snakes, and she has been hunting them since. Kalil kept pet snakes, too, and once had a boa constrictor. 'Go get a snake' Recently, Kalil took part in the python challenges, bringing family and friends to hunt with her. She found a dead python each time -- a 9-foot one and then a 10-foot snake with its head chewed off. She barbecued one, and had purses, wallets and key chains made from the skin. She had the python bone attached to existing snake-shaped earrings. It was a good luck charm. But more than two hours into Thursday's hunt -- even with the earrings -- she hadn't found any pythons. Neither had most hunters. The mild temperatures at night, and the wind and lack of humidity, weren't ideal conditions. "It's always a good day to be out in the Everglades. However, it's a better day to be out there getting pythons," said Tom Rahill, founder of the Florida-based Swamp Apes, an organization dedicated to taking veterans out on wilderness adventures to help them transition to civilian life. Rahill said he has captured 400 pythons; he struck out on Thursday, too. But he serenaded Kalil with a baritone pick-me-up tune. "Oh, Donna is amazing. Oh, Donna's a friend of mine. Go get a snake," he sang. "You can do it. You can do it," Rahill said. 'Look on the bright side' Two days earlier, a Swamp Apes member killed three pythons. One measured nearly 13 feet long. Encouraged, Kalil set off again after Rahill's song. But after about an hour, she came up empty. She didn't want to stop. "Got the python fever, I guess," she said before wrapping up. She didn't worry about prolonging the inevitable: killing her first snake. "I live in the moment. When it comes and I have to do it, I'm sure I'll have an issue with it," she said. But she said she'll save the life of another animal with every python kill. And maybe that's how she will get over it, she said. "Look on the bright side," she said. Correction: A previous version of this story incorrectly stated that pythons eat vegetation.  
1491420053	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/05/politics/trump-susan-rice-committed-crime/index.html	Offering no evidence, Trump suggests Susan Rice unmasking requests may be criminal - CNNPolitics.com	Washington (CNN)President Donald Trump said former White House National Security Adviser Susan Rice may have committed a crime when requesting to unmask the names of Trump's associates who were incidentally mentioned on intercepted communications during the Obama administration. Speaking to The New York Times Wednesday, Trump said, "I think it's going to be the biggest story." He continued,"It's such an important story for our country and the world. It is one of the big stories of our time." Trump, asked by the Times, if he believed Rice committed a crime, responded, "Do I think? Yes, I think." Trump offered no evidence to back his allegations or any names of other Obama administration officials he said were also involved. He did not suggest that his assertions came from new intelligence reports but said he would explain himself further "at the right time." Democrats on Capitol Hill blasted Trump. Rep. Adam Schiff, the top Democrat on the House intelligence committee, said that if Trump is going to accuse Rice of a crime, he should make the intelligence public. "If he's going to make accusations of criminality of anyone, he needs to show evidence to support that kind of a charge," Schiff said. "Obviously, that's not something he was either able or willing to do with respect to his accusations against Obama. It's not something I suspect he's going to be able to do with Susan Rice either." Rep. Eric Swalwell, a California Democrat on the intelligence panel, said he views the allegation as an attempt to divert attention from the ongoing probe into Russian contacts. "I don't expect they will (declassify) because I think this is just more obstruction," Swalwell said. "If he has evidence that she committed a crime, he actually can show us what his evidence is. Right now he has a credibility problem because he's been proved wrong a lot. ... This seems nothing more than buying time and obstructionism." Trump did not repeat his claim at a White House news conference shortly after the Times interview. CNN's Jeremy Herb and Tal Kopan contributed to this report. 
1491421184	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/05/politics/donald-trump-assad-syria-north-korea/index.html	Sobering world crises land on Trump's doorstep - CNNPolitics.com	Washington (CNN)The world's most dire crises are landing at Donald Trump's feet 11 weeks into his presidency, putting a global spotlight on the new US leader and laying bare the still-unformed elements of his foreign policy. At the White House Wednesday, Trump was meeting with a key US ally -- Jordan's King Abdullah II -- and speaking by phone with two others, German Chancellor Angela Merkel and Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe, to explain how his young administration plans to confront a spate of foreign challenges. All three are urgently looking for Trump to more fully articulate what, until now, have been vague proclamations of US policy toward some of the world's most volatile regions. Trump himself offered perhaps the most distilled statement of his driving foreign vision on Tuesday while speaking with a group of union workers in Washington. "I'm not, and I don't want to be, the president of the world," Trump said. "I'm the President of the United States -- and from now on it's going to be America first." Trump has offered that view before, and has made no secret that he's not eager to inject the US into crises he says are someone else's problem. But even as Trump was reiterating his commitment to prioritize US concerns over those of the rest of the world, the issues that keep his foreign counterparts awake at night were flaring. Before he spoke on Tuesday, shocking images of atrocities in Syria prompted outrage -- and finger-pointing -- at the White House. Hours later, North Korea test-launched another ballistic missile, an apparent display of bombast ahead of Trump's highly anticipated summit with Chinese President Xi Jinping in Florida on Thursday and Friday. Trump acknowledged Wednesday that the world's problems were now his. But he offered little explanation for how he planned to confront them. "I now have responsibility, and I will have that responsibility and carry it very proudly," Trump said during a news conference with Abdullah, with whom he huddled earlier in the Oval Office. But asked whether he would take new action, Trump remained coy. "You will see," Trump said. Trump was responding to questions about his response to the chemical attack in Syria, which he said in a written statement Tuesday was partly due to inaction by his predecessor. "These heinous actions by the Bashar al-Assad regime are a consequence of the past administration's weakness and irresolution," he said. Syria Trump's administration offered a pessimistic view on Assad's fate in Syria, citing political realities there as a reason the brutal dictator isn't likely to leave anytime soon. "There is not a fundamental option of regime change, as there has been in the past," White House press secretary Sean Spicer said Tuesday. The lack of options in Syria isn't a new conundrum -- President Barack Obama often cited the country's civil war as the predicament that haunted him most. The Trump administration has mustered the display of outrage that many world partners were seeking, including convening an emergency session at the United Nations Security Council, chaired by US Ambassador Nikki Haley. But the White House's frank admission that Assad would remain in power in Damascus for the foreseeable future was a break from the past, and a reflection that Trump plans to bring US foreign affairs in a new direction. There are few US interests in Syria, and becoming engaged in military conflict there would undoubtedly mean American deaths. Four years after Obama failed to gain support from Congress for a strike on Assad's positions, there remains little appetite for a broader scale American effort there. And Trump, whose transactional views of foreign policy are openly expressed, sees little reason for the US to become more engaged. North Korea But in his conversations with Merkel and Abdullah on Wednesday, Trump will be reminded that the world still looks to US presidents for leadership at moments of crisis. The migrant flood stemming from Syria's civil war has affected both leaders' countries intensely. Both now find themselves partnering with a US leader they fear could be turning away. North Korea's test launch provided another reminder to Trump of the volatile world he inherited in January. Obama warned Trump before he took office that the rogue nation's nuclear program would present him with the most worrisome global challenge. Trump, in the transition period, requested more detailed information about the country's ambitions from the intelligence officials who delivered his initial briefings. Unlike in Syria, where the White House acknowledged that options were slim, administration officials projected a comprehensive plan to confront Pyongyang if the missile tests continue. "The clock has now run out and all options are on the table," one official told reporters Tuesday, pointing to the failure of successive administration's efforts to negotiate an end to North Korea's nuclear program. But in a break from previous practice, Secretary of State Rex Tillerson offered an intentionally curt statement on the launch. "North Korea launched yet another intermediate range ballistic missile," Tillerson said. "The United States has spoken enough about North Korea. We have no further comment." China The test launch came ahead of Trump's summit in Florida this week with the enigmatic and calculating Xi, which will amount to the most important meeting with a foreign leader since Trump took office. Behind the scenes in the West Wing, moderate and hardline aides are competing for Trump's ear as he prepares for the talks, according to multiple US officials familiar with preparation for the meetings. The summit is being closely monitored in both countries after a bumpy start to perhaps the most important bilateral relationship in the world, which will be critical in confronting North Korea's threats. Trump, however, is insistent that partnership with Beijing isn't a requirement for staving off the nuclear threat. "Well, if China is not going to solve North Korea, we will," he told the Financial Times last week. "That is all I am telling you."  
1491421132	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/05/politics/thomas-massie-syria-attack-not-assad/index.html	Congressman: "I don't think" Assad is behind Syria attack - CNNPolitics.com	Washington (CNN)Republican Rep. Thomas Massie expressed doubt Wednesday that Syrian President Bashar al-Assad is responsible for Tuesday's chemical attack, and reinforced his stance that US intervention could "end up making the situation worse." Speaking on CNN's "At This Hour" with Kate Bolduan, the Kentucky lawmaker told the host that he didn't think the Syrian leader launched the attack, and that further intervention by the US government may aggravate the situation. "Frankly, I don't think Assad would have done that," Massie said. "It does not serve his interests." Dozens of people -- including at least 10 children -- died, and more than 200 people were injured in a suspected chemical weapons attack in northern Syria Tuesday. Activist groups and some US officials have attributed the tragedy to Assad and his regime, including President Donald Trump who cited Assad's administration Wednesday. When a visibly stunned Bolduan pressed Massie on who -- if not Assad -- may be responsible for the attack, Massie seemed to suggest that the incident could have been unintentional. "You've got a war going on over there," Massie said. "Supposedly that airstrike was on an ammo dump, and so I don't know if it was released because there was gas stored in the ammo dump or not -- that's plausible." RELATED: Trump is erasing the red line in Syria and drawing a hard line on North Korea Massie, who voted against Syrian intervention in 2014, repeated his past statements that US involvement may exacerbate the conflict, citing uncertainty of the reality of the situation. "We might end up making the situation worse if we launch airstrikes," Massie said. "The first casualty of war is the truth, and it's hard to know exactly what's happening in Syria right now." When asked about President Donald Trump's blame of former President Barack Obama for the attack, Massie would not assign culpability to the former administration. "He's gone," Massie said. "It's ours to deal with now." Some Republicans -- including Trump -- have also called out Assad. "These heinous actions by the Assad regime cannot be tolerated," Trump said at a Rose Garden news conference. "The United States stands with our allies across the globe to condemn this horrific attack and all other horrific attacks, for that matter." Appearing on CNN's "New Day" Tuesday, Arizona Republican Sen. John McCain said the event may been connected to recent indications by the Trump administration that they will prioritize combating ISIS over removing Assad from power. "Bashar Assad and his friends, the Russians, take note of what Americans say," McCain said. "I'm sure they took note of what our Secretary of State (Rex Tillerson) said just the other day, that the Syrian people would be determining their own future themselves -- one of the more incredible statements I've ever heard." RELATED: McCain rips Trump administration over Syria policy When Bolduan played footage of McCain's comments for Massie, the congressman called his Republican colleague "wrong." "With all due respect to the senator from Arizona, he's wrong," Massie said. "He's not expressing the will of the American people."  
1491421108	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/05/politics/republican-faltering-health-care/index.html	Republicans to leave town without health care deal - CNNPolitics.com	Washington (CNN)No deal on legislation to repeal and replace Obamacare is expected before lawmakers head home for a two-week break, putting a cap for now on the on-again, off-again talks that have divided the Republican party. A senior administration source and two senior GOP congressional aides acknowledged that there's no agreement. And House lawmakers tell CNN they're not changing their travel plans and will leave Washington on Thursday. The effort to revive the health care bill that faltered late last month manifested itself in a series of closed-door meetings involving Vice President Mike Pence, White House officials and key GOP lawmakers. The overall dynamics, however, never changed. Conservatives are set on their wish list and Republicans centrists have made clear those requests go too far. But the way lawmakers and the Trump White House have found themselves in the same exact box canyon they wallowed in as the initial iteration of "repeal and replace" imploded less than two weeks ago is illustrative of complexity that continues to dominate -- and plague -- this internal debate. Asked for a status check in the wake of the more than two-hour Tuesday evening affair, one GOP official directly involved was blunt: "No closer to a final deal than we were 24 hours ago, and actually, quite possibly further away than we've ever been." What's driving the current impasse? Confusion. Conservatives in the House Freedom Caucus said Monday night they'd been told very specific things were placed on the table by Pence and Office of Management and Budget Director Mick Mulvaney: Giving states the option of applying for waivers to opt out of three central Obamacare requirements -- essential health benefits,community rating and guaranteed issue. What does that mean? Well, these areas have been identified as crucial by conservatives to reaching their ultimate -- and repeatedly (and repeatedly and repeatedly) stated -- goal: lowering premiums. And that's likely true -- the essential health benefits provision forms the federal floor of what each insurance plan must contain. The guaranteed issue and community rating measures protect those with pre-existing conditions because they require insurers to sell policies to all enrollees, but bar them from charging higher prices to those with health conditions. Community rating also prevents insurers from charging women more. RELATED - More insurers abandon Obamacare. Who might be next? The trade off in providing more robust coverage to individuals regardless of their health status is an increase in the cost of plans. In a sense, these changes would directly undercut Republicans' promise to keep Obamacare's protections for those with pre-existing conditions. But conservatives counter that other provisions in the GOP plan, specifically high risk pools funded run by states but seeded with federal money, would essentially back fill the removal of those regulations, should states opt out. But that's a very, very tough sell to the moderates in the conference, who, according to several who spoke privately with CNN, fear the fallout of including those three opt-out measures in any plan. While amenable to the idea of giving states the option of opting out of essential health benefits, how easily states obtain a waiver remains an open -- and exceedingly important -- question. On top of that, several sources involved in the process said moderates were caught off guard by the news that the other two regulations were on the table. What happened inside last night's meeting? Talk. And lots of it. But there was limited, if any, progress on the thorniest issues: those regulations the White House is explicitly putting on the table in an effort to navigate a compromise. Instead, the discussion settled primarily on the structure and purpose of state run high risk pools, and the possibility of sending more money in that direction via atop the currently allotted $115 billion for a state stability fund. House Energy and Commerce Committee staff briefed on the technical side of everything and circulated some of their own language. But the risk pools were always an accepted area of general agreement. Their inability to even substantively dig in on the key outstanding issues, at least in a way where they start chopping away at the areas of disagreement, "tells you all you need to know about this meeting," one participant said. What was the red flag that things weren't moving forward Tuesday night? There was no legislative text put to the table by the White House. While House GOP staff brought, and circulated, technical language to try and bring members along, even those staffers appeared unclear about what was actually put on the table by the White House, according to one participant involved in the process. Freedom Caucus members insist they're open to the proposal put on the table by Pence and Mulvaney. But member after member from the group say the actual legislative language is crucial and no decisions will be made by the group until that has been put on the table. RELATED: Republicans still searching for a plan B on health care The absence of that language last night was identified as a red flag by participants in all sides of the debate -- and central to the roadblocks that still exist. "I want to make sure I'm clear: there were no agreements tonight," Rep. Mark Meadows, the North Carolina Republican who chairs the Freedom Caucus, told reporters. "There was a general agreement that the progress we're making is really progress." What now? More talk. Lawmaker after lawmaker, seemingly in a coordinated fashion, emerged from the meeting after 10:30 p.m. ET noting that "good progress" had been made. The same players are planning to meet again Wednesday in an effort to hash out agreement on the most difficult issues -- those insurance regulations. But early-week optimism that perhaps a path forward was clearing and, quite possibly, they were on their way to a House floor vote this week, has been decimated. Outside conservative groups, who have stuck firmly behind -- and helped drive -- the Freedom Caucus efforts were preparing to launch a broadside against the party's moderates on Wednesday for standing in the way of what they view as a clear compromise. Majority Leader Kevin McCarthy, R-California, made a surprise visit to the Tuesday meeting which otherwise boasted a grand total of zero participants that came from the party's leadership. But as he departed, he made clear that while lawmakers and the administration were still pushing forward on a bill, it would be "difficult to finish one by the end of the week." The House is currently scheduled to start its two-week Spring recess on Thursday afternoon. As one senior GOP aide involved in the first go-round of "repeal and replace" put it: "Welcome to reality." This story will be updated. CNN's Lauren Fox, Deirdre Walsh and Ashley Killough contributed to this report. 
1491421014	http://money.cnn.com/2017/04/05/media/can-fox-news-stand-by-bill-oreilly/index.html	More than 30 advertisers have left Bill O'Reilly. Can Fox News stand by him? - Apr. 5, 2017	Brown: Time for Fox to clean shop Bill O'Reilly's future at Fox News is the number one topic among Manhattan media executives, entertainment agents and journalists. But the network is keeping mum. Seemingly the only place where it isn't being discussed is on Fox News. Neither O'Reilly nor Fox has said much about last weekend's report in the New York Times about settlements with five different women who accused the host of sexual harassment or verbal abuse. The matter has only been addressed briefly on Fox's air, and O'Reilly hasn't discussed it in the two editions of his show, "The O'Reilly Factor," that have aired since the story broke. Fox's strategy of silence might make sense for now, given that O'Reilly is more than just a profit center for the company: he is an institution there, almost inseparable from the network, and long seemingly invincible. Then again, that's exactly what media observers said last summer when Roger Ailes was sued by former Fox News anchor Gretchen Carlson for sexual harassment. Ailes resigned two weeks later. As Ailes faced an onslaught of sexual harassment allegations, several of the network's on-air personalities strenuously defended him in the press. And when O'Reilly faced a sexual harassment lawsuit in 2004, he delivered a ferocious response on-air the night it was filed. Now, though, even as more than 30 advertisers have dropped his show, O'Reilly and his network aren't fighting back publicly. Related: Trump defends O'Reilly: 'I don't think Bill did anything wrong' Fox News' relatively subdued response has driven speculation throughout New York media about whether the longtime king of cable news could be on the way out -- and whether such a scenario is even plausible. Most would have dismissed the idea offhand at any other time, but the marked contrast between Fox's strategy in the past compared to now is fueling the discussion. It could be a sign that network mogul Ruper Murdoch and his sons are following through on their pledge to remedy the network's culture. On the other hand, the Murdochs might be quietly circling the wagons, demonstrating the same type of loyalty that Ailes inspired in many of his employees and perhaps bowing to financial reality. Fox reportedly renewed O'Reilly's contract knowing that the Times story would be coming out. The Washington Post reported that the new deal extends at least through 2020. Were Fox to have a change of corporate heart, there would be an incredibly expensive breakup fee. Contracts have clauses and escape hatches. But if it really goes to 2020, those could be very expensive for the network. some expensive escape hatches Then there's the matter of a replacement. Fox has no obvious person in line to succeed O'Reilly right now. "They are running plays from the Roger Ailes playbook and it is out of date," said one media executive at another company. "The Murdoch sons were supposedly 'disgusted' by Ailes' style and tactics, and couldn't wait to run him out of the company -- but if imitation is the sincerest form of flattery, they seem to be heaping praise on Ailes this week." Related: Why Bill O'Reilly and Fox News might be able to weather advertiser storm Of course, there could be millions of reasons why Fox News is standing by O'Reilly. As in millions of viewers, and hundreds of millions of dollars. "The O'Reilly Factor" has been the no. 1 program on cable news for 16 years running, and it's coming off the best quarter of ratings it's ever had. On Monday, the show demonstrated its ratings prowess once again, drawing 3.65 million viewers -- far more than any of its competitors. It's also a cash cow. "The O'Reilly Factor" generated more than $178 million in advertising revenue in 2015 and over $118 million in the first nine months of 2016, according to Kantar Media. An on-air personality at a rival network said O'Reilly is a "holy grail" for advertisers. "You can't go alt-right if you're a major corporation," the source said. "He's as far as you can go to reach older, conservative Americans." The exact fallout of the advertising exodus isn't clear yet. Paul Rittenberg, Fox News' executive vice president of advertising sales, said in a statement Tuesday that the network was working with advertisers to "address their current concerns about the O'Reilly Factor," and that "the ad buys of those clients have been re-expressed into other FNC programs." That would suggest that the advertising revolt, such as it is, hasn't affected Fox's bottom line -- at least not yet. Mercedes-Benz and Sanofi, two companies to withdraw from the "Factor," both confirmed to CNNMoney that their ads would be re-allocated to other Fox programs. Only one organization, the Society for Human Resource Management, said it had ended its advertising on the entire network. Related: Read what Bill O'Reilly's sponsors are saying about 'disturbing allegations' of harassment Richard Levick, a public relations specialist who has worked in crisis management, said that "it's going to have to get very costly" before Fox shoves O'Reilly out. "This is all about the math," said Levick. "This is not about doing the right thing. If Fox was interested in doing the right thing, it would have done it long ago." "The question that Fox has to ask is, are viewers going to start getting asked by their children: 'Why are you watching this man?'" he added. "And once Fox feels that that moment's come, that will have as much, if not more, resonance than the advertising dollars." Levick said that we're living in the "age of mercantile activism," which could change the equation for the advertisers -- and for Fox. "If the ads are just being reassigned to other Fox shows, it temporarily gives companies the opportunity to do the right thing and look good," said Levick. "But as mercantile activism continues to evolve, consumers are going to begin asking why they're spending money on the network at all." The racial justice organization Color of Change intends to ask that question forcefully. The group called on advertisers to drop O'Reilly this week, and Rashad Robinson, its executive director, said he will be "monitoring what these companies are doing." In 2009, the group spearheaded a similar campaign aimed at advertisers on Glenn Beck's Fox News program. O'Reilly has weathered controversies before, often emerging from them with even more power, but Robinson thinks this time around could be different. "At the end of the day," Robinson said, "money speaks to the Murdochs." CNNMoney (New York) First published April 5, 2017: 3:36 PM ET
1491422081	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/05/entertainment/shia-labeouf-man-down-ticket/index.html	Shia LaBeouf film sells one ticket in U.K. - CNN.com	(CNN)Will the one person who purchased a ticket to see Shia LaBeouf's new war movie please step forward? "Man Down" opened in the UK this weekend, and Variety reported that only one ticket was purchased. The film screened at a single theater, Reel Cinema in Burnley, England, and according to the cross platform measurement company ComScore, raked in £7, or about $8.70. "Man Down" was also released on demand at the same time and will be out on DVD and Blu-ray next month. The film stars LaBeouf as a Marine who searches for his estranged son after returning from a tour of Afghanistan. It was released in limited theaters stateside in December 2016.  
1491422044	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/05/politics/adam-schiff-white-house-documents/index.html	Schiff: Trump promised documents, but WH staff is fighting release - CNNPolitics.com	(CNN)The top Democrat on the House Russia investigation, Rep. Adam Schiff, said Wednesday President Donald Trump personally promised documents at the center of "unmasking" allegations would be made available to all members of the House intelligence committee, but that White House staff is fighting those documents' release. "The President, when I met with him, said that he is happy to have whoever we wanted review the documents. His staff has opposed that, they were opposed to even letting my own staff review the documents, my staff director," Schiff told CNN Wednesday. "So we're still trying to get those documents for the full committee, we would like the White House's help if they are sincere about wanting to share this information and have the oversight functions performed, they are to be facilitating this." He added, "But as yet we have not been able to make those documents available to the full committee." CNN has reached out to the White House for comment on Schiff's characterization, and have not yet received a response. Schiff also said that he has signed on to two formal invites -- one inviting FBI Director James Comey and NSA Director Mike Rogers to return to the House Intelligence Committee and a second rescheduling the public hearing with former acting Attorney General Sally Yates, former CIA Director John Brennan and former Director of National Intelligence James Clapper. But Schiff said that House Intelligence Chairman Devin Nunes has not yet signed the letter to bring Yates, Brennan and Clapper before investigators. A Republican source responded to Schiff's comments by saying the committee "is committed to speaking to Comey, Rogers, Yates, Clapper, and Brennan, and the committee is now working out arrangements for all five of them to appear." "Because Comey and Rogers were unable to answer around 100 questions at their open hearing, there is discussion about whether the questions put to some of these witnesses can be answered in another open hearing or would require a classified setting," the source added. The White House intelligence documents have taken on greater importance in the two weeks since Nunes secretly traveled to the White House grounds to view them. The intelligence has formed the core of Trump's argument that former national security adviser Susan Rice spied on him, and Trump himself upped the ante in a New York Times interview saying he believed Rice committed a crime. Schiff first mentioned his issues obtaining those documents earlier Wednesday. "The White House clearly only wanted one person to see these documents, and that person was our chairman," Schiff said on CNN's "New Day," referring to Nunes' coordination with White House staff to review documents showing top Trump aides were picked up in "incidental" collection by US intelligence. "I want the full committees to be able to see that, and we're meeting resistance," Schiff said. "If these documents are so damning or so indicating of the President, as he suggests, why are they opposing efforts to provide them to the full committee? I think that's a question worthy of the White House answering." Schiff's accusation marks a turn from just one day ago, when he said that the White House promised to show its intelligence to the other members of the House intelligence committee. Some lawmakers even said they might travel to the White House as early as Tuesday afternoon to review the intelligence, but as of Wednesday morning, Schiff and Nunes were the only lawmakers to have seen the intelligence reports. The intelligence reports at the White House are at the center of two weeks of chaos that led top Democrats to call on Nunes to recuse himself from the House Russia investigation and, later, formed the core of Trump's argument that former national security adviser Susan Rice was responsible for surveillance against him. Since Rice's name first surfaced in conservative media outlets Monday, interest has grown in what the intelligence reports actually show. RELATED: House Russia investigators briefed on Nunes findings, White House trip possible House Democratic Leader Nancy Pelosi said Wednesday she plans to review the intelligence and doesn't "expect to" run into any resistance from the White House. "I expect that I will see that," Pelosi said Wednesday. She then accused Trump of making House Republicans look like "fools." "The White House has made fools of their allies in the House of Representatives in the way they've handled this," Pelosi said. "They cook up some intelligence. They bring the chairman of the committee -- a very distinguished position which he has tarnished -- they use him as a tool to tell him what they have cooked up, now you go tell the President what we have cooked up and try to represent to the American people that this is legitimate intelligence."  
1491422018	http://money.cnn.com/2017/04/04/media/list-oreilly-factor-advertisers-responses/index.html	Read what Bill O'Reilly's sponsors are saying about 'disturbing allegations' of harassment - Apr. 4, 2017	O'Reilly accuser: I'm not after money Fox News' "The O'Reilly Factor" is facing a rapidly growing exodus of advertisers in the wake of a New York Times report that five different women had reached settlements over allegations of sexual harassment or verbal abuse against the show's host, Bill O'Reilly. CNNMoney has reached out to dozens of the companies that have run ads on the program. Below is a list of the responses we've received so far, as well as some responses that companies have put on their Twitter accounts after users of that site asked them about their ads. Companies pulling their ads from "The O'Reilly Factor" Mercedes-Benz: "Yes, we had advertising running on The O'Reilly Factor (we run on most major cable news shows) and it has been reassigned in the midst of this controversy. The allegations are disturbing and, given the importance of women in every aspect of our business, we don't feel this is a good environment in which to advertise our products right now." Hyundai: "Hyundai currently has no advertising on The O'Reilly Factor. We had upcoming advertising spots on the show but are reallocating them due to the recent and disturbing allegations. As a company we seek to partner with companies and programming that share our values of inclusion and diversity. We will continue to monitor and evaluate the situation as we plan future advertising decisions." BMW of North America: "In light of the recent New York Times investigation, BMW of North America has suspended its advertising with 'The O'Reilly Factor.'" Mitsubishi: "Mitsubishi Motors takes these allegations very seriously and we have decided that we will pull our advertising at the present time. We will continue to monitor this situation as we assess our long-term strategy." Lexus: "We take our duties as a responsible advertiser seriously and have been closely monitoring the situation involving 'The O'Reilly Factor.' In response, we have asked our media-buying partners to move all Lexus ad inventory out of the program." Ainsworth Pet Nutrition: "We removed our advertising from the program because of these recent and disturbing allegations." Constant Contact: "Based on the recent allegations and our strong commitment to inclusion, respect and tolerance in the workplace, we have decided to pull Constant Contact's ads from The O'Reilly Factor." Credit Karma: "In light of the recent concerning allegations, we will not be advertising on this show and have asked for our ads to be removed." Bayer: "Bayer supports a safe, respectful and non-abusive environment for women and we have reached out to Fox to voice our concerns regarding this matter. Based on the serious nature of these allegations, we have made the decision to suspend all advertising on the program in question. This suspension has been requested immediately and will be handled as expeditiously as possible. We have been informed, however, that programming changes may not become effective immediately. It is important to note that Bayer purchases packages of advertising time across all major networks without selecting placement on any specific program. We regularly evaluate our advertising purchases to make sound judgments to continue or discontinue based upon our beliefs, values and ethical considerations." TrueCar: "Pending further assessment of recent developments, we have instructed our media buyer to direct our advertising to other programming." GlaxoSmithKline: "We are continually reviewing our advertising to ensure it is conducted in a responsible manner aligned with our values. We have temporarily put a hold on spots running on The O'Reilly Factor while we assess this situation." Sanofi: "At Sanofi Consumer Healthcare, decisions about advertising on any given website, network, magazine, or programs are never undertaken as an endorsement or non-endorsement of the host, editorial or entertainment content. Rather, our purpose in advertising our product is to provide important information to consumers so that they may make an informed decision about which product will best provide relief for their symptoms. The controversy around The O'Reilly Factor program and allegations made against Bill O'Reilly are matters that we take seriously and will continue to monitor. We do not endorse the behavior or opinions of program hosts or the content. We have reallocated our current advertising originally scheduled during this program. We will continue to monitor and evaluate the situation as we plan future advertising decisions." UNTUCKit: "As a company in which more than 2/3rd of our employees are women, we take sexual harassment claims very seriously. Moreover, it is important our corporate partners reflect the same principles of inclusivity and equality upon which we have built our brand. In light of the disturbing allegations, we instructed our media buyer this morning to reallocate our ad dollars to other shows effective immediately. We will continue to closely monitor the situation but believe this is the right decision at this time." Allstate: "Inclusivity and support for women are important Allstate values. We are concerned about the issues surrounding the program and we have suspended our advertising." Esurance: "In light of the recent controversies surrounding Bill O'Reilly and his treatment of women, Esurance is suspending its advertising during "The O'Reilly Factor." At Esurance, inclusion and support for women extends across all aspects of our business — from our associates to our customers to our partners. And we want to partner with organizations and programming that share those same values." T. Rowe Price: "We regularly evaluate our media buys to ensure alignment with our corporate values, and in light of the recent allegations we have decided to pull our upcoming ads from The O'Reilly Factor." Wayfair: "We do not have any future ad buys planned for the show at this time. We condemn all forms of harassment and are closely assessing the situation. We have advertised on the show in the past and in light of the reports have moved our spots to other programming while we assess the situation." Orkin: "Orkin buys its advertising in broad dayparts on networks that reach our target audience. We do not buy specific shows, including the O'Reilly Factor. The O'Reilly Factor is in the daypart that we buy on Fox, and we have added that show to our "Do Not Buy" list in the wake of the current allegations." Society for Human Resource Management: "SHRM has determined to cease its current advertising on the Fox News Network." The Wonderful Company: "At The Wonderful Company, we are committed to a respectful and inclusive workplace enviornment and insist upon the same from our business partners. We do not currently have or plan for ad inventory on this show." Coldwell Banker: "We were disappointed that our ad ran on O'Reilly as it wasn't part of our intentional media programming. We pulled future ads from the show." H&R Block: "We share your concern about recent allegations, and no longer advertise during The O'Reilly Factor as a result." Weather Tech: "We are already working on adjusting our advertising schedule and we appreciate your feedback." Advil: "We are no longer advertising on the Bill O'Reilly show." BambooHR: "BambooHR condemns workplace harassment, and in light of recent allegations, has canceled ads on The O'Reilly Factor." Jenny Craig: "As an organization, Jenny Craig condemns any and all forms of sexual harassment. As a matter of corporate policy, we do not publicly comment on our advertising strategy. We are constantly evaluating our media buys to maximize the efficiency of our corporate investment and effectively reach our target audience. However, we can confirm that we have suspended all ads on The O'Reilly Factor." Ancestry: "Equality and respect are core values for Ancestry, especially in the workplace. We will not support those whose actions conflict with those values. To be clear, we have pulled our ads from Bill O'Reilly." Subaru: "After review, we will no longer advertise during the Bill O'Reilly show in the future." Old Dominion Freight Line: "In light of the recent allegations surrounding the Bill O'Reilly show, OD has decided to discontinue our commercials from the show." Amica Insurance: "Our ads on The O'Reilly Factor are being pulled. It may take a few days for this to occur." LegalZoom: "This was not part of our intentional media programming and we have pulled all ads from this show." Invisalign: "Align Technology is redirecting its media buy for Invisalign spots and will not advertise on/around The O'Reilly Factor." Pacific Life: "As of today, Pacific Life is no longer an advertiser on the O'Reilly Factor." Visionworks: "Visionworks' media buy was with Fox News, not with any show specifically. Once we learned about the allegations, we pulled our ads from the program. Our media strategy is built around programming that aligns with our company's, and our customer's, core values. We continually review our advertising strategy and update on a quarterly basis, however when situations arise, we are able to work with our media partners to act swiftly to ensure our core values are embodied. After recent allegations on "The O'Reilly Factor," Visionworks has pulled all ads." Stanley Steemer: "We are in the process of removing our commercials from 'The O'Reilly Factor."' Carfax: "For more than 30 years, CARFAX has been working hard as a consumer advocate to give Americans the facts about used cars. The ongoing controversy over The O'Reilly Factor is a distraction from our mission to help millions of consumers. Therefore, we have instructed FOX News to remove our advertising from the program." Eli Lily and Company: "Eli Lilly and Company has suspended its advertising on The O'Reilly Factor for now." Allstar Products Group: "It was a corporate decision for Allstar Products Group to pull the media." Companies currently evaluating whether or not to keep advertising on "The O'Reilly Factor" Trivago: "We are constantly reviewing our media buys to ensure we do not support any behavior that contradicts trivago's corporate values. We are currently reviewing the information available, but do not discuss our advertising strategy publicly." Enterprise Holdings: "We are looking into this, but we haven't made any decisions." TD Ameritrade: "We don't have a direct media buy with the program, and we have only run advertising on the show once in the last quarter. We have no plans to run anything else, at a minimum, until much later in the spring. Harassment in any form is unacceptable, and because one of our core values is People Matter, this is a situation that we are monitoring closely. If we need to make additional changes to our media buying strategy down the road, we have the flexibility to do so." Expedia: "We regularly evaluate all of our media buying, as we are doing now with regard to this program." Companies that will continue to advertise on "The O'Reilly Factor" Angie's List: "The advertising strategy we have long used at Angie's List is meant to reach as many people as possible with news that our service exists and is available to them. We place ads across a wide spectrum of venues intending to reach as many viewers/listeners/ readers as possible without taking a position on the viewpoints of the venues themselves. Just as we trust members to make their own hiring decisions, we trust them to make their own media consumption decisions." Companies that have ceased advertising on "The O'Reilly Factor" for other reasons CFP Board: "CFP Board does not have a partnership or a sponsorship with Fox News. Our television advertising is purchased through an advertising network where the advertisements are placed on multiple cable television channels and shows. As our spring flight is winding down, we will no longer have any placements on Fox News." Companies that aren't saying Quincy Bioscience: "We don't publicly comment on our advertising. As a company we condemn all forms of sexual harassment." CNNMoney (New York) First published April 4, 2017: 1:29 PM ET
1491421919	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/05/golf/play-suspended-at-masters-par-3-contest/index.html	Masters 2017: Par 3 Contest canceled - CNN.com	(CNN)For the first time in its history, the Masters Par 3 Contest will not have a winner. Citing inclement weather and safety concerns, the Augusta National Golf Club announced the cancellation of Wednesday's traditional event. "The safety of everyone on our grounds was the determining factor in the decision to close the course and cancel the Par 3 Contest," Billy Payne, chairman of Augusta National, said in a statement. "We share in the disappointment of our patrons, but the safety of everyone on our grounds is always our primary concern." Earlier in the day, the course was evacuated, as a morning wave of storms closed the grounds from 10 a.m until 12:30 p.m. ET. Play started at 12:30 p.m. ET, the same time the gates reopened to patrons. The event originally was scheduled to start at noon. The second and final evacuation came at 1:25 p.m. ET. "The course will be closed for the remainder of the day," the Masters Twitter account said. Only two players, Bubba Watson and Webb Simpson, finished the nine-hole course. No winner was declared. The Par 3 Contest, which has been taking place since 1960, occurs the day before the start of the Masters Tournament. According to the Masters website, tournament participants, noncompeting past champions and honorary Invitees are invited to participate. No Par 3 Contest winner has followed that with a Masters Tournament victory that same week. The 81st edition of the Masters Tournament starts Thursday. CNN's Dan Moriarty contributed. 
1491421864	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/05/politics/republican-faltering-health-care/index.html	Republicans to leave town without health care deal - CNNPolitics.com	Washington (CNN)No deal on legislation to repeal and replace Obamacare is expected before lawmakers head home for a two-week break, putting a cap for now on the on-again, off-again talks that have divided the Republican party. A senior administration source and two senior GOP congressional aides acknowledged that there's no agreement. And House lawmakers tell CNN they're not changing their travel plans and will leave Washington on Thursday. The effort to revive the health care bill that faltered late last month manifested itself in a series of closed-door meetings involving Vice President Mike Pence, White House officials and key GOP lawmakers. The overall dynamics, however, never changed. Conservatives are set on their wish list and Republicans centrists have made clear those requests go too far. But the way lawmakers and the Trump White House have found themselves in the same exact box canyon they wallowed in as the initial iteration of "repeal and replace" imploded less than two weeks ago is illustrative of complexity that continues to dominate -- and plague -- this internal debate. Asked for a status check in the wake of the more than two-hour Tuesday evening affair, one GOP official directly involved was blunt: "No closer to a final deal than we were 24 hours ago, and actually, quite possibly further away than we've ever been." What's driving the current impasse? Confusion. Conservatives in the House Freedom Caucus said Monday night they'd been told very specific things were placed on the table by Pence and Office of Management and Budget Director Mick Mulvaney: Giving states the option of applying for waivers to opt out of three central Obamacare requirements -- essential health benefits,community rating and guaranteed issue. What does that mean? Well, these areas have been identified as crucial by conservatives to reaching their ultimate -- and repeatedly (and repeatedly and repeatedly) stated -- goal: lowering premiums. And that's likely true -- the essential health benefits provision forms the federal floor of what each insurance plan must contain. The guaranteed issue and community rating measures protect those with pre-existing conditions because they require insurers to sell policies to all enrollees, but bar them from charging higher prices to those with health conditions. Community rating also prevents insurers from charging women more. RELATED - More insurers abandon Obamacare. Who might be next? The trade off in providing more robust coverage to individuals regardless of their health status is an increase in the cost of plans. In a sense, these changes would directly undercut Republicans' promise to keep Obamacare's protections for those with pre-existing conditions. But conservatives counter that other provisions in the GOP plan, specifically high risk pools funded run by states but seeded with federal money, would essentially back fill the removal of those regulations, should states opt out. But that's a very, very tough sell to the moderates in the conference, who, according to several who spoke privately with CNN, fear the fallout of including those three opt-out measures in any plan. While amenable to the idea of giving states the option of opting out of essential health benefits, how easily states obtain a waiver remains an open -- and exceedingly important -- question. On top of that, several sources involved in the process said moderates were caught off guard by the news that the other two regulations were on the table. What happened inside last night's meeting? Talk. And lots of it. But there was limited, if any, progress on the thorniest issues: those regulations the White House is explicitly putting on the table in an effort to navigate a compromise. Instead, the discussion settled primarily on the structure and purpose of state run high risk pools, and the possibility of sending more money in that direction via atop the currently allotted $115 billion for a state stability fund. House Energy and Commerce Committee staff briefed on the technical side of everything and circulated some of their own language. But the risk pools were always an accepted area of general agreement. Their inability to even substantively dig in on the key outstanding issues, at least in a way where they start chopping away at the areas of disagreement, "tells you all you need to know about this meeting," one participant said. What was the red flag that things weren't moving forward Tuesday night? There was no legislative text put to the table by the White House. While House GOP staff brought, and circulated, technical language to try and bring members along, even those staffers appeared unclear about what was actually put on the table by the White House, according to one participant involved in the process. Freedom Caucus members insist they're open to the proposal put on the table by Pence and Mulvaney. But member after member from the group say the actual legislative language is crucial and no decisions will be made by the group until that has been put on the table. RELATED: Republicans still searching for a plan B on health care The absence of that language last night was identified as a red flag by participants in all sides of the debate -- and central to the roadblocks that still exist. "I want to make sure I'm clear: there were no agreements tonight," Rep. Mark Meadows, the North Carolina Republican who chairs the Freedom Caucus, told reporters. "There was a general agreement that the progress we're making is really progress." What now? More talk. Lawmaker after lawmaker, seemingly in a coordinated fashion, emerged from the meeting after 10:30 p.m. ET noting that "good progress" had been made. The same players are planning to meet again Wednesday in an effort to hash out agreement on the most difficult issues -- those insurance regulations. But early-week optimism that perhaps a path forward was clearing and, quite possibly, they were on their way to a House floor vote this week, has been decimated. Outside conservative groups, who have stuck firmly behind -- and helped drive -- the Freedom Caucus efforts were preparing to launch a broadside against the party's moderates on Wednesday for standing in the way of what they view as a clear compromise. Majority Leader Kevin McCarthy, R-California, made a surprise visit to the Tuesday meeting which otherwise boasted a grand total of zero participants that came from the party's leadership. But as he departed, he made clear that while lawmakers and the administration were still pushing forward on a bill, it would be "difficult to finish one by the end of the week." The House is currently scheduled to start its two-week Spring recess on Thursday afternoon. As one senior GOP aide involved in the first go-round of "repeal and replace" put it: "Welcome to reality." This story will be updated. CNN's Lauren Fox, Deirdre Walsh and Ashley Killough contributed to this report. 
1491421685	http://money.cnn.com/2017/04/05/media/can-fox-news-stand-by-bill-oreilly/index.html	More than 30 advertisers have left Bill O'Reilly. Can Fox News stand by him? - Apr. 5, 2017	Brown: Time for Fox to clean shop Bill O'Reilly's future at Fox News is the number one topic among Manhattan media executives, entertainment agents and journalists. But the network is keeping mum. Seemingly the only place where it isn't being discussed is on Fox News. Neither O'Reilly nor Fox has said much about last weekend's report in the New York Times about settlements with five different women who accused the host of sexual harassment or verbal abuse. The matter has only been addressed briefly on Fox's air, and O'Reilly hasn't discussed it in the two editions of his show, "The O'Reilly Factor," that have aired since the story broke. Fox's strategy of silence might make sense for now, given that O'Reilly is more than just a profit center for the company: he is an institution there, almost inseparable from the network, and long seemingly invincible. Then again, that's exactly what media observers said last summer when Roger Ailes was sued by former Fox News anchor Gretchen Carlson for sexual harassment. Ailes resigned two weeks later. As Ailes faced an onslaught of sexual harassment allegations, several of the network's on-air personalities strenuously defended him in the press. And when O'Reilly faced a sexual harassment lawsuit in 2004, he delivered a ferocious response on-air the night it was filed. Now, though, even as more than 30 advertisers have dropped his show, O'Reilly and his network aren't fighting back publicly. Related: Trump defends O'Reilly: 'I don't think Bill did anything wrong' Fox News' relatively subdued response has driven speculation throughout New York media about whether the longtime king of cable news could be on the way out -- and whether such a scenario is even plausible. Most would have dismissed the idea offhand at any other time, but the marked contrast between Fox's strategy in the past compared to now is fueling the discussion. It could be a sign that network mogul Ruper Murdoch and his sons are following through on their pledge to remedy the network's culture. On the other hand, the Murdochs might be quietly circling the wagons, demonstrating the same type of loyalty that Ailes inspired in many of his employees and perhaps bowing to financial reality. Fox renewed O'Reilly's contract knowing that the Times story would be coming out. The Washington Post reported that the new deal extends at least through 2020. Contracts have clauses and escape hatches. But if it really goes to 2020, those could be very expensive for the network. Then there's the matter of a replacement. Fox has no obvious person in line to succeed O'Reilly right now. "They are running plays from the Roger Ailes playbook and it is out of date," said one media executive at another company. "The Murdoch sons were supposedly 'disgusted' by Ailes' style and tactics, and couldn't wait to run him out of the company -- but if imitation is the sincerest form of flattery, they seem to be heaping praise on Ailes this week." Related: Why Bill O'Reilly and Fox News might be able to weather advertiser storm Of course, there could be millions of reasons why Fox News is standing by O'Reilly. As in millions of viewers, and hundreds of millions of dollars. "The O'Reilly Factor" has been the no. 1 program on cable news for 16 years running, and it's coming off the best quarter of ratings it's ever had. On Monday, the show demonstrated its ratings prowess once again, drawing 3.65 million viewers -- far more than any of its competitors. It's also a cash cow. "The O'Reilly Factor" generated more than $178 million in advertising revenue in 2015 and over $118 million in the first nine months of 2016, according to Kantar Media. An on-air personality at a rival network said O'Reilly is a "holy grail" for advertisers. "You can't go alt-right if you're a major corporation," the source said. "He's as far as you can go to reach older, conservative Americans." The exact fallout of the advertising exodus isn't clear yet. Paul Rittenberg, Fox News' executive vice president of advertising sales, said in a statement Tuesday that the network was working with advertisers to "address their current concerns about the O'Reilly Factor," and that "the ad buys of those clients have been re-expressed into other FNC programs." That would suggest that the advertising revolt, such as it is, hasn't affected Fox's bottom line -- at least not yet. Mercedes-Benz and Sanofi, two companies to withdraw from the "Factor," both confirmed to CNNMoney that their ads would be re-allocated to other Fox programs. Only one organization, the Society for Human Resource Management, said it had ended its advertising on the entire network. Related: Read what Bill O'Reilly's sponsors are saying about 'disturbing allegations' of harassment Richard Levick, a public relations specialist who has worked in crisis management, said that "it's going to have to get very costly" before Fox shoves O'Reilly out. "This is all about the math," said Levick. "This is not about doing the right thing. If Fox was interested in doing the right thing, it would have done it long ago." "The question that Fox has to ask is, are viewers going to start getting asked by their children: 'Why are you watching this man?'" he added. "And once Fox feels that that moment's come, that will have as much, if not more, resonance than the advertising dollars." Levick said that we're living in the "age of mercantile activism," which could change the equation for the advertisers -- and for Fox. "If the ads are just being reassigned to other Fox shows, it temporarily gives companies the opportunity to do the right thing and look good," said Levick. "But as mercantile activism continues to evolve, consumers are going to begin asking why they're spending money on the network at all." The racial justice organization Color of Change intends to ask that question forcefully. The group called on advertisers to drop O'Reilly this week, and Rashad Robinson, its executive director, said he will be "monitoring what these companies are doing." In 2009, the group spearheaded a similar campaign aimed at advertisers on Glenn Beck's Fox News program. O'Reilly has weathered controversies before, often emerging from them with even more power, but Robinson thinks this time around could be different. "At the end of the day," Robinson said, "money speaks to the Murdochs." CNNMoney (New York) First published April 5, 2017: 3:36 PM ET
1491421494	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/05/middleeast/idlib-syria-attack/index.html	Syria attack survivors describe chemical bombs falling from sky - CNN.com	This story contains graphic imagery. (CNN)Survivors of a deadly attack in Syria described chemical bombs being dropped from planes, directly contradicting the government's version of events. Global condemnation intensified Wednesday, the day after the apparent chemical attack on a rebel-held town in Idlib province that killed at least 70 people, including children, one of the deadliest since the Syrian war began six years ago. The White House and the UK blamed Syrian President Bashar al-Assad's regime for the attack that struck at dawn in Khan Sheikhoun when some were still asleep. At the United Nations, Western powers lambasted Russia for standing by the regime. The World Health Organization said victims bore the signs of exposure to nerve agents, and Amnesty International said evidence pointed to an "air-launched chemical attack." International agencies are investigating the origin of the agents used in the strike. Key developments Chemical weapons expert: Russia's explanation of events is "highly implausible." President Donald Trump said the attack changed his views on Syria and Assad. Medical experts said the attack was likely the result of a nerve agent, such as sarin gas. The UN Security Council held an emergency meeting but didn't vote on a resolution. War of words Trump called the attack on innocent civilians an "affront to humanity." "These heinous actions by the Assad regime cannot be tolerated," Trump said Wednesday. He said the chemical attack has changed his views Syria and Assad. "It crossed a lot of lines for me. When you kill innocent children, innocent babies ... with a chemical gas that is so lethal that people were shocked to hear what gas it was, that crosses many, many lines -- beyond a red line." Russia asserted the deaths resulted from a gas released when a regime airstrike hit a chemical weapons factory. But survivors being treated in a hospital on the Turkish side of the border told a CNN team they saw chemical bombs being dropped from planes. The Russian Defense Ministry said on its Facebook page that a Syrian airstrike hit "workshops, which produced chemical warfare munitions" on the eastern outskirts of Khan Sheikhoun. It said "terrorists" had been transporting the chemical munitions from their largest arsenal to Iraq. But Dan Kaszeta, a chemical weapons specialist, told CNN the Russian version of events was "highly implausible." "Nerve agents are the result of a very expensive, exotic, industrial chemical process -- these are not something you just whip up," said Kaszeta, managing director of Strongpoint Security, a security consulting firm based in London. "It's much more plausible that Assad, who's used nerve agents in the past, is using them again." Hours after the attack, several people were injured when an airstrike hit near a hospital in the same town. Survivors of the earlier attack were being treated there, the Aleppo Media Center activist group reported. The hospital was knocked out of service, said the Syrian Civil Defense rescue group, known as the White Helmets. Victim: 'I don't know if my family is dead or alive' Mazin Yusif, a 13-year-old-boy, broke down in tears Wednesday at the Reyhanli Hospital in southern Turkey near the Syrian border. About 25 survivors of Tuesday's attack are being treated there, and several said they saw a plane drop chemical bombs. "At 6:30 in the morning, the plane struck. I ran up on our roof and saw that the strike was in front of my grandfather's house," Mazin told CNN. He said he ran toward his house and found his grandfather slumped over. He ran outside to call for help. "I got dizzy and then fainted in front of my grandfather's garage. I next found myself here in this hospital, naked in a bed." The boy's grandmother, Aisha al-Tilawi, 55, said she saw blue and yellow after the plane dropped a chemical-laden bomb. "We started choking, felt dizzy, then fainted. Mazin was trying to wake up his grandfather. Three of my family died," she said, lying in bed with an oxygen mask on her face. Another survivor, Ahmed Abdel Rahim, 31, stared vacantly from his hospital bed while explaining he was hit with a poisonous substance carried by three rockets. "I was in my house. I had difficulty breathing, but I feel better now. But I did throw up after getting to the hospital. I don't know if my family is dead or alive. I don't know anything," he said. Worldwide condemnation WHO said some victims showed symptoms consistent with exposure to a category of chemicals that includes nerve agents. That conclusion was supported by Amnesty International, which said victims were "very likely" to have been exposed to a compound such as sarin. The Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons said it was gathering evidence about the attack. Speaking at a high-level meeting in Belgium on the future of Syria, UK Foreign Secretary Boris Johnson blamed the Syrian regime. "All the evidence I have seen suggests that it was the Assad regime who did it, in full knowledge they were using illegal weapons in a barbaric attack on their own people," Johnson said. Assad's military has repeatedly denied using chemical weapons and consistently blames "terrorist" groups when chemical attacks are reported. But many of these are delivered through airstrikes, and no rebel or terrorist group in Syria is believed to have the capacity to carry out aerial bombardments. A UN investigation in August found that chemical weapons had been used in Syria, both by the national air force and ISIS militants. It found two instances where regime forces had used chlorine as a chemical weapon, and one where ISIS had used mustard gas between 2014 and 2015. The Syrian Coalition, an umbrella opposition group, compared this week's suspected chemical attack to one in 2013 in eastern Ghouta "that the international community allowed to pass without accountability or punishment." A UN report found that sarin had been used on civilians in the earlier attack that activists said killed about 1,400 people. UN emergency meeting At an emergency meeting Wednesday of the UN Security Council, Nikki Haley, the US ambassador, held up photographs of children foaming at the mouth as evidence of the attack. "If Russia has the influence in Syria that it claims to have, we need to see them use it," said Haley, who is also the council president. "We need to see them put an end to these horrific acts. How many more children have to die before Russia cares?" Haley hinted that the United States was open to using military action in response. "When the UN consistently fails in its duty to act collectively, there are times in the life of states that we are compelled to take our own action," she said. Haley threatens 'our own action' in Syria if UN doesn't act Russia, Syria's most powerful ally, made clear it would not support a resolution put forward by the United States, the UK and France condemning the use of chemical weapons within Syria and requiring the regime to provide flight logs from the day of the attack. Russia has used its veto power as a permanent member of the Security Council at least seven times on Syrian resolutions. On Wednesday afternoon, Security Council members left closed consultations without taking a vote on the draft resolution. No member spoke as they left the chambers. Syria's deputy ambassador to the United Nations, Mounzer Mounzer, flatly denied accusations his government is responsible, blaming "terrorist groups" for the dozens of deaths. "Syria also reaffirms that the Syrian Arab Army does not have any form or type of chemical weapons," he said. "We have never used them, and we will never use them." CNN's Euan McKirdy, Ben Wedeman, Tamara Qiblawi, Eyad Kourdi, Lindsay Isaac, Onur Cakir, Richard Roth and Milena Veselinovic contributed to this report. 
1491421478	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/05/world/iyw-syria-resource-list-2/index.html	Help Syrians survive the conflict - CNN.com	(CNN)As Syria enters its seventh year of civil war, "the need for humanitarian aid and the protection of Syrian civilians has never been greater," according to UN Secretary-General Antonio Guterres. Tuesday, the country faced another crisis -- a chemical attack that killed at least 70 people, including 10 children. Since the war began in 2011, an estimated 400,000 Syrians have died. The fighting has also cost the country more than $16 billion of lost crop and livestock production and destroyed farming assets, according to the UN. No matter where you live, there are ways you can help the Syrian people with food, shelter, medical aid and other basic needs. Simply click the button below and support organizations aiding those in crisis.  
1491421460	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/04/us/lemon-oreilly-rice-twitter-cnn-tonight-cnntv/index.html	Don Lemon vs. Bill O'Reilly: Made for TV, waged on Twitter - CNN.com	(CNN)CNN's Don Lemon and FOX News' Bill O'Reilly may not go head to head on television -- O'Reilly hits cable airwaves at 8 p.m., Lemon's show begins at 10 -- but it takes more than a two-hour primetime discrepancy to keep two TV titans from squaring off on social media. On Tuesday afternoon, Lemon responded to an O'Reilly Twitter post by saying, among other things, "False." Lemon's social message was in response to an earlier tweet from the rival cable news host, one in which O'Reilly claimed Monday's edition of "CNN Tonight" failed to cover a recent story surrounding Susan Rice and alleged improper handling of national intelligence. The O'Reilly post pushed audiences to a short snippet of a Lemon segment from the previous evening, a clip featuring the anchor's pledge to not "aid and abet" those trying to misinform the American people through claims that Donald Trump or his team had been surveilled, or spied upon. Though the video was paired with a description suggesting Lemon had "declared his show a Rice-free zone," content from the program suggests otherwise. As promised off the top, Lemon and an assortment of expert guests devoted a wide swath of television time to Rice and the day's claims that President Obama's former national security adviser had used government secrets to push a political agenda. Rice has since vehemently denied the Trump administrations accusations.  
1491421397	http://money.cnn.com/2017/04/05/investing/stocks-jobs-adp/index.html	Markets pull back as Fed fears trump good jobs news - Apr. 5, 2017	Trump's views on the jobs report come full circle More Americans are finding work. That's great news, and stocks soared Wednesday morning, thanks to it. But the Federal Reserve threw some cold water on the bulls by the end of the day. The Dow surged nearly 200 points Wednesday after payroll processor ADP issued a strong jobs report about the private sector. That's raising hopes that the official government figures that will come out Friday morning will also show healthy job gains. But the market pulled back and gave up nearly all of its gains by the end of the day after minutes from the Federal Reserve showed that some members of the central bank felt that stocks were "quite high." Powered by SmartAsset.com SMARTASSET.COM ADP said that 263,000 jobs were added in March, well ahead of forecasts for about 175,000. Both ADP and the government reported solid jobs gains for February. So investors appear to be banking that the momentum in the labor market will continue. Despite Wednesday's topsy-turvy trading, the market appears to be back on solid footing after a recent dip following President Trump's failure to push forward on a deal to repeal and replace Obamacare. But investors have expressed hope that Trump will be able to get a tax reform plan approved and possibly a big economic stimulus plan aimed at rebuilding road, bridges and other infrastructure. Related: Jamie Dimon compares Trump to an airline pilot. You have to root for him Bank stocks rallied early Wednesday as well, after Trump reiterated plans Tuesday to try to undo parts of the Dodd-Frank financial reform law. JPMorgan Chase (JPM) CEO Jamie Dimon also said in his annual shareholder letter Tuesday that regulations are holding the economy back. Related: Big Oil could be ready for a big comeback The recent stock rally has helped push tech stocks like Apple (AAPL, Tech30), Amazon (AMZN, Tech30) and Microsoft (MSFT, Tech30) to all-time highs. The Nasdaq, which is home to these three as well as Facebook (FB, Tech30) and Google parent Alphabet (GOOGL, Tech30), again hit a new record earlier Wednesday. The Nasdaq is now up almost 10% so far this year and is approaching the 6,000 milestone. And CNNMoney's Fear & Greed Index, which measures seven indicators of market sentiment, has bounced back from the Fear levels that it hit just a week ago. It's now in Neutral mode and has inched closer to Greed. A great jobs number Friday might push the index back to Greed -- and lift stocks even higher. But a solid jobs report might also make the Fed more likely to step up its pace of rate hikes. And Wall Street would not like that. CNNMoney (New York) First published April 5, 2017: 11:17 AM ET
1491421354	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/03/health/aspirin-fight-cancer-death-study/index.html	Low-dose aspirin can reduce risk of death from cancer, study says - CNN.com	(CNN)An aspirin a day may keep the doctor away. It may also reduce your chances of dying from cancer, according to a study on long-term regular aspirin use and different kinds of cancer. Yin Cao, an instructor in the Medicine, Clinical and Translational Epidemiology Unit at Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School, presented the information Monday at the American Association for Cancer Research meeting in Washington. Cao looked at data from over 86,000 women who were part of the Nurses' Health Study between 1980 and 2012 and over 43,000 men who were part of the Health Professionals Follow-Up Study from 1986 to 2012. Over that 32-year period, over 8,200 women and nearly 4,600 men died of cancer. The risk of death overall was 7% lower for women and 11% for men who took aspirin regularly, compared with those who did not. The risk of dying from cancer was 7% lower for women and 15% lower for men who took aspirin regularly, compared with those who didn't take a regular dose. The strongest connection was with colorectal cancer: There was a 31% lower risk for women and 30% for men who were among regular aspirin takers, as other studies have showed. But it also lowered women's risk of dying from breast cancer by 11% and men's risk of dying from prostate cancer by 23%. Men's risk of dying from lung cancer was also lower. "Evidence has been accumulating very rapidly showing aspirin works in reducing cancer and cardiovascular disease mortality," Cao said. "It is good to remember, though, if a person wants to take a low-dose aspirin, especially if a person has had cancer, they will want to have an initial conversation with their doctor first." Not everyone can take aspirin, particularly if you are at high risk for ulcers and gastrointestinal bleeding. Studies have showed an increased risk of both when taking a daily aspirin, but the benefit does outweigh the risk for most other people. Rulla Tamimi, the epidemiology chair for the American Association for Cancer Research annual meeting, thought the presentation was a beneficial one, particularly since scientists are trying to better understand drugs we may all have in our medicine cabinets. "There has been a great deal of interest in understanding the possible benefits associated with common drugs," Tamimi said in an emailed statement. "This study found strong evidence that aspirin use may reduce cancer death. The study was well conducted and was able to control for a number of important confounders. Therefore the findings are believed to be very robust, and suggest that aspirin, which is widely available, cheap and has limited toxicity, has the potential to have widespread benefit on cancer mortality for breast, colon, lung and prostate cancer." Studies have also found that aspirin can help patients who have had (or are at high risk for) a heart attack or stroke, and of course it is a good drug to relieve pain. Even the ancient Egyptians used the natural form of it for pain relief centuries ago. In April 2016, the US Preventive Service Task Force said in a final recommendation statement that taking a regular low-dose aspirin a day may prevent colon cancer and cardiovascular disease for adults between 50 and 69 who have a 10% or greater risk of cardiovascular disease or colorectal cancer. Cao hopes her study will continue to broaden the body of research to include cancer-related deaths overall. Next, her group hopes to study what specific groups may most benefit from this practice, particularly based on those individuals with varying cancer risk.  
1491421339	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/05/politics/donald-trump-assad-syria-north-korea/index.html	Sobering world crises land on Trump's doorstep - CNNPolitics.com	Washington (CNN)The world's most dire crises are landing at Donald Trump's feet 11 weeks into his presidency, putting a global spotlight on the new US leader and laying bare the still-unformed elements of his foreign policy. At the White House Wednesday, Trump was meeting with a key US ally -- Jordan's King Abdullah II -- and speaking by phone with two others, German Chancellor Angela Merkel and Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe, to explain how his young administration plans to confront a spate of foreign challenges. All three are urgently looking for Trump to more fully articulate what, until now, have been vague proclamations of US policy toward some of the world's most volatile regions. Trump himself offered perhaps the most distilled statement of his driving foreign vision on Tuesday while speaking with a group of union workers in Washington. "I'm not, and I don't want to be, the president of the world," Trump said. "I'm the President of the United States -- and from now on it's going to be America first." Trump has offered that view before, and has made no secret that he's not eager to inject the US into crises he says are someone else's problem. But even as Trump was reiterating his commitment to prioritize US concerns over those of the rest of the world, the issues that keep his foreign counterparts awake at night were flaring. Before he spoke on Tuesday, shocking images of atrocities in Syria prompted outrage -- and finger-pointing -- at the White House. Hours later, North Korea test-launched another ballistic missile, an apparent display of bombast ahead of Trump's highly anticipated summit with Chinese President Xi Jinping in Florida on Thursday and Friday. Trump acknowledged Wednesday that the world's problems were now his. But he offered little explanation for how he planned to confront them. "I now have responsibility, and I will have that responsibility and carry it very proudly," Trump said during a news conference with Abdullah, with whom he huddled earlier in the Oval Office. But asked whether he would take new action, Trump remained coy. "You will see," Trump said. Trump was responding to questions about his response to the chemical attack in Syria, which he said in a written statement Tuesday was partly due to inaction by his predecessor. "These heinous actions by the Bashar al-Assad regime are a consequence of the past administration's weakness and irresolution," he said. Syria Trump's administration offered a pessimistic view on Assad's fate in Syria, citing political realities there as a reason the brutal dictator isn't likely to leave anytime soon. "There is not a fundamental option of regime change, as there has been in the past," White House press secretary Sean Spicer said Tuesday. The lack of options in Syria isn't a new conundrum -- President Barack Obama often cited the country's civil war as the predicament that haunted him most. The Trump administration has mustered the display of outrage that many world partners were seeking, including convening an emergency session at the United Nations Security Council, chaired by US Ambassador Nikki Haley. But the White House's frank admission that Assad would remain in power in Damascus for the foreseeable future was a break from the past, and a reflection that Trump plans to bring US foreign affairs in a new direction. There are few US interests in Syria, and becoming engaged in military conflict there would undoubtedly mean American deaths. Four years after Obama failed to gain support from Congress for a strike on Assad's positions, there remains little appetite for a broader scale American effort there. And Trump, whose transactional views of foreign policy are openly expressed, sees little reason for the US to become more engaged. North Korea But in his conversations with Merkel and Abdullah on Wednesday, Trump will be reminded that the world still looks to US presidents for leadership at moments of crisis. The migrant flood stemming from Syria's civil war has affected both leaders' countries intensely. Both now find themselves partnering with a US leader they fear could be turning away. North Korea's test launch provided another reminder to Trump of the volatile world he inherited in January. Obama warned Trump before he took office that the rogue nation's nuclear program would present him with the most worrisome global challenge. Trump, in the transition period, requested more detailed information about the country's ambitions from the intelligence officials who delivered his initial briefings. Unlike in Syria, where the White House acknowledged that options were slim, administration officials projected a comprehensive plan to confront Pyongyang if the missile tests continue. "The clock has now run out and all options are on the table," one official told reporters Tuesday, pointing to the failure of successive administration's efforts to negotiate an end to North Korea's nuclear program. But in a break from previous practice, Secretary of State Rex Tillerson offered an intentionally curt statement on the launch. "North Korea launched yet another intermediate range ballistic missile," Tillerson said. "The United States has spoken enough about North Korea. We have no further comment." China The test launch came ahead of Trump's summit in Florida this week with the enigmatic and calculating Xi, which will amount to the most important meeting with a foreign leader since Trump took office. Behind the scenes in the West Wing, moderate and hardline aides are competing for Trump's ear as he prepares for the talks, according to multiple US officials familiar with preparation for the meetings. The summit is being closely monitored in both countries after a bumpy start to perhaps the most important bilateral relationship in the world, which will be critical in confronting North Korea's threats. Trump, however, is insistent that partnership with Beijing isn't a requirement for staving off the nuclear threat. "Well, if China is not going to solve North Korea, we will," he told the Financial Times last week. "That is all I am telling you."  
1491423216	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/05/middleeast/diplomacy-doesnt-work-in-syria-analysis/index.html	Analysis: Why diplomacy stopped working in Syria - CNN.com	(CNN)The last time President Bashar al-Assad appeared to turn chemical weapons on Syria's civilians, the US President blinked. Assad crossed President Barack Obama's red line without consequence. This time, America's new President, Donald Trump, says he won't look the other way. That he is horrified how "beautiful little babies" have been killed by chemical weapons that are "so lethal." But will the world now look to the US for leadership in putting an end to Assad's slaughter? The answer, for many reasons, is possibly not. President Trump has hardly set himself up as the ally you need in a tight spot. It's still far from clear to his traditional allies if he means what he says. He has, to say the least, been both contrary and contradictory. His pronouncements on a number of international issues -- be it on the EU, Brexit, NATO, Russia, China and North Korea -- have weakened confidence and raised concerns that the US may not be the friend to many that it once was. Until last week, the closest his administration had come to articulating a policy on Assad was Secretary of Defence James Mattis saying " ... on the Assad issue, we are working on this one day at a time as we throw Daesh [ISIS] on to the back foot," and Secretary of State Rex Tillerson saying "I think the status and the longer-term status of President Assad will be decided by the Syrian people". Trump's response to Assad's apparent attack this week is likely to erode the confidence of allies further. In the immediate aftermath he said: "These heinous actions by the Bashar al-Assad regime are a consequence of the past administration's weakness and irresolution. President Obama said in 2012 that he would establish a 'red line' against the use of chemical weapons and then did nothing." Then, On Wednesday, he appeared in the White House Rose Garden beside Jordan's King Abdullah, suggesting that he might take unspecified action against Assad: "I now have responsibility, and I will have that responsibility and carry it very proudly ... These heinous actions by the Assad regime cannot be tolerated." In the aftermath of Tuesday's horrific scenes, the UN rushed to gather leading diplomats to debate the outrage. Few expect that the outcome of their talks will amount to more than the usual handwringing -- as has been the case ever since Obama failed to enforce his "red line." The vacuum created by the Obama administration's lack of action in Syria allowed Russia to take control of the conflict. Now, Russian President Vladimir Putin dominates the international agenda on Syria. His forces tip the military balance both in the sky and on the ground. It was Russia that arranged the recent peace talks in Kazakhstan and increasingly, in America's absence, has had greater behind-the-scenes heft at UN peace discussions. Indeed, Russia has already rushed to Assad's defense with an implausible smoke screen story that the Syrian air force bombed a "terrorist" chemical weapons facility, resulting in the release of the toxic gases. As long as Russia sticks to this line, a unified international response on Assad is impossible. Meanwhile, international outrage and indignation has been piling up. António Guterres, the UN Secretary General, while attending EU talks in Brussels aimed at alleviating the suffering inside Syria said: "The horrific events of yesterday demonstrate unfortunately that war crimes are going on in Syria and that international humanitarian law (is) being violated frequently." The EU talks themselves, coming as they do after years of conflict which has led to hundreds of thousands being killed and millions forced from their homes, is a reminder that international resolve these days amounts to little more than picking up the pieces after a disaster. France has called on Guterres to bring world powers to the table at the UN. Just last week at a NATO foreign minister's meeting in Brussels, France's foreign minister appeared critical of Trump's position on Assad, demanding that Rex Tillerson provide more details of the recently revealed US ambivalence to Assad's continuing authority. Whatever coalition of the willing may have existed, it is clearly fraying. Britain's Foreign Secretary Boris Johnson added his outrage to the mix: "All the evidence I have seen suggests that it was the Assad regime who did it in a full knowledge they were using illegal weapons in a barbaric attack on their own people. I would like to see those culpable pay a price for what they have done and I certainly cannot see how a government like that could continue to have any kind of legitimate administration over the people of Syria." Johnson, perhaps by virtue of Britain's "special relationship" with the US, will be more acutely aware than most of how unready they are to face down Assad. Trump's campaign, in part, was built on the bullish rhetoric of bombing ISIS out of existence. His speeches rarely, if ever, broadened out to Syria and Assad. Indeed, his early warmth toward Russian President Vladimir Putin, whose forces side with Assad, seemed to hint that Assad could get some kind of free pass, as long as ISIS was crushed. In the wake of yesterday's attack, the US is proposing a UN resolution. It is redolent with language we have become used to when talking about Syria. It condemns, expresses, recalls, emphasizes and requests, but in no place does it demand or insist. Equally unclear was US ambassador to the UN Nikki Haley's statement that "when the UN consistently fails in its duty to act collectively there are times in the life of states that we are compelled to take our own actions". Yet again, the international community will likely gum away at the issue. "Jaw jaw," British PM Theresa May said earlier this week -- quoting Winston Churchill this week, albeit on an entirely separate issue -- is better than "war war." But in the case of Syria, until the UN shows and uses its teeth, Assad and Russia's war will continue spewing carnage. To lay responsibility for the horrors in Syria and the response to them at Trump's door may be misplaced, although it's hard to overlook that this attack came less than a week after the White House backed away from the previous US policy of demanding that Assad must go. The manner in which Trump's predecessor handled the last major Syria chemical attack came to define his international legacy: Obama was weak when put to the test. This reinforces White House spokesman Sean Spicer's assertion last week that Trump has been left a weak hand on Syria. But how astutely Trump plays the few cards he has in this unfolding crisis may come to define his own overseas legacy. After the comments Trump made standing next to King Abdullah, Assad will be wondering if Trump has set him a new red line, and if so how far he can push it. Trump's allies will be worrying that the new president may have already wrong-footed himself .  
1491423111	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/04/politics/who-is-susan-rice/index.html	Why Susan Rice is the perfect villain for Republicans - CNNPolitics.com	Washington (CNN)Since her time as a national security adviser and former UN ambassador during the Obama administration, Susan Rice had largely been out of the limelight until she was recently thrust into the snowballing White House surveillance controversy. Rice reportedly asked on numerous occasions to uncover the identities of President Donald Trump's associates caught on tape incidentally during intelligence surveillance. The report quickly re-opened an unsubstantiated debate on whether the Obama administration previously ordered wiretaps on Trump's phones. Trump has been one of the staunchest boosters of the idea that the Obama White House was responsible for hacking him and appeared to back up his claim again on Wednesday, telling the New York Times that Rice's actions were potentially criminal. "I think it's going to be the biggest story," Trump said. "It's such an important story for our country and the world. It is one of the big stories of our time." Asked by the Times if he believed Rice's actions were criminal Trump responded, "Do I think? Yes, I think." Rice defended her actions earlier this week, telling MSNBC on Tuesday that her requests were "absolutely not for any political purposes, to spy, or anything." "There were occasions when I would receive a report in which a US person was referred to -- name not provided, just a US person -- and sometimes in that context, in order to understand the importance of the report, and assess its significance, it was necessary to find out, or request the information as to who the US official was," Rice said. "The notion that some people are trying to suggest, is that by asking for the identity of a person is leaking it, is unequivocally false," Rice added. "There is no connection between unmasking and leaking." It's not the first time Rice has found herself at the center of a political controversy. A steadfast fixture through both of Obama's presidential terms, she served as the US ambassador to the United Nations and later national security adviser from 2013 to 2017. Benghazi At one point Rice had a clear trajectory to succeed Hillary Clinton as secretary of state in 2013, but withdrew her name from consideration following a public outcry over her role in the handling of the Benghazi attacks. In the days following the September 11, 2012, attacks on the Benghazi consulate that killed Ambassador Chris Stevens and three other Americans, Rice became the Obama administration's point person on the matter. In multiple TV appearances soon after that attack, Rice cited an anti-Islam video that fueled a "spontaneous" mob as the reason for the deaths. Senior US officials later said that Rice's comments were based on an intelligence assessment that was eventually updated to reflect a preliminary view that demonstrators were not the culprits. But some Republicans suggested Rice's initial characterization was fueled by politics during a presidential campaign, and criticism intensified as the explanation of events changed. The administration eventually raised the possibility that the attack was planned by al Qaeda. Months after the attack, Rice's comments in the wake of the attack were used as grist by Senate Republicans who said they could not support her as Clinton's successor. Obama eventually appointed Sen. John Kerry of Massachusetts to the role. Bowe Bergdahl Following her appointment as national security adviser, Rice created some waves in a 2014 interview where she appeared to offer pity for accused Army deserter Bowe Bergdahl, who had just been released to the US. Bergdahl was accused of deserting his unit in 2009. After nearly five years in Taliban captivity, the US exchanged five Taliban prisoners for his release. Rice told CNN in an interview at the time that Bergdahl served the United States with "honor and distinction." "I realize there has been lots of discussion and controversy around this," Rice said. "But what I was referring to was the fact that this was a young man who volunteered to serve his country in uniform at a time of war. That, in and of itself, is a very honorable thing." As details of Bergdahl's disappearance became public following his release, the Obama administration came under increasing fire for its decision to trade the Taliban prisoners. Rice's comments attracted criticism from members of the military and Republicans who viewed Bergdahl as a deserter and objected to the trade. Friend of Albright Rice's path began decades ago with the help of family friend Madeleine Albright, the woman who became the first female secretary of state. While serving under President Bill Clinton, Albright recommended that he tap Rice for a high-level State Department post on African affairs in the late 1990s. Albright had previously served with Rice's mother, Lois Rice, on a school board in Washington and watched Rice grow up with her own daughters. "If I were to characterize her, whether it's playing basketball or anything else, she's fearless," Albright said about Rice in a Washington Post interview during her time as the top US diplomat. Rice, 52, was born in Washington to parents with distinguished careers. Her mother, who passed away this January, was an expert on financing of higher education and served on the board of directors of 11 major US corporations. She was characterized as the trailblazing executive behind Pell Grants. Her father, Emmett Rice, died in 2011. He was a professor of economics at Cornell University, was a member of the Federal Reserve Board of Governors and flew with the Tuskegee Airmen in World War II. 'The Bulldozer' Rice, who was valedictorian of her class and a star point guard on the basketball team at the National Cathedral School, exhibited "superior leadership skills" and "left behind a remarkable legacy," wrote former teacher John Wood who noted Rice's accomplishments in a Washington Post letter to the editor. She earned Phi Beta Kappa honors at Stanford University, where she earned her bachelors degree in history and won a Rhodes Scholarship to study international relations at Oxford University in 1986. After graduation from Oxford, Rice headed to McKinsey & Company in Toronto, where she worked as an international management consultant. In 1992, she married Ian Cameron, a producer for the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation, whom she had met at Stanford. In 1993, Rice returned to Washington to take a position with the National Security Council as director of international organizations and peacekeeping. She was promoted in 1995 to become special assistant to Clinton and senior director of African affairs at the White House National Security Council. In 2008, she was national security and foreign relations adviser for Obama's first presidential campaign. In nominating her to the ambassador's post, Obama called Rice "a close and trusted adviser" and said she "shares my belief that the UN is an indispensable -- and imperfect -- forum." At the same time, she has drawn some attention for the way she operates. Insiders say Rice is ambitious and aggressive. Colum Lynch of the Washington Post and Foreign Policy told CNN that one of her nicknames at the UN Security Council was "The Bulldozer." "I think that everyone has complicated feelings about her," Lynch said. He characterized her as "very personable, likeable, charming, smart, funny, down to earth" but also someone with sharp elbows. Rice is currently a Distinguished Visiting Research Fellow at American University, where she is both mentoring students on careers in national security and working on her next book. CNN's Allison Brennan and Jim Acosta contributed to this report. 
1491423031	http://money.cnn.com/2017/04/05/media/pepsi-pulls-kendall-jenner-ad/index.html	Pepsi pulls controversial Kendall Jenner protest ad after backlash - Apr. 5, 2017	Kendall Jenner's ad sparks controversy Pepsi has pulled its controversial Kendall Jenner ad. The soda company made the announcement Wednesday after the ad triggered an immediate online backlash for using protest imagery to market the soft drink. "Pepsi was trying to project a global message of unity, peace and understanding. Clearly we missed the mark, and we apologize," the company said in a statement. "We did not intend to make light of any serious issue. We are removing the content and halting any further rollout." Pepsi (PEP) also apologized to Jenner herself for putting her "in this position." The ad, in which Jenner participates in a photo shoot before joining a group of protesters and offering a Pepsi to a stoic police officer, was accused of appropriating the Black Lives Matter movement and using social justice to sell soda. Bernice King, a daughter of Martin Luther King Jr., was among those who commented on the tone-deaf nature of the ad. "If only Daddy would have known about the power of #Pepsi," she tweeted, with a black-and-white photo of her father being confronted by a highway patrol officer. In a response on Twitter, Pepsi said the company believes in King's legacy and meant no disrespect. Activist DeRay Mckesson tweeted sarcastically about the ad: "If I had carried Pepsi I guess I never would've gotten arrested. Who knew?" Comedian Jim Gaffigan also mocked the ad in a tweet. "'But you said you wanted social media to talk about Pepsi.' - Advertising guy to Pepsi executive before agency is fired," Gaffigan tweeted. CNNMoney (New York) First published April 5, 2017: 1:32 PM ET
1491423000	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/04/entertainment/prison-break-review/index.html	'Prison Break' new blueprint heavy on crazy - CNN.com	(CNN)"Prison Break" had a great cast, thrill-ride pace and logic-be-damned quality when it premiered in 2005, which was fun, at least for a while. Fox's revival, alas, begins with a flawed blueprint, while suffering from a been-there, broke-out-of-that quality. Where the series gradually became crazier with each passing season, the new version basically kicks off in wacky, crazy, off-the-rails mode, with much of the action set in a Yemeni prison and dodging ISIS fighters part of the obstacle course. The nostalgia of seeing everyone back together thus quickly dissipates, and it becomes increasingly difficult to check one's brain at the cell door. Picking up seven years later, this limited series quickly goes through the paces of reassembling the gang, including, yes, Michael Scofield (Wentworth Miller), whose death was greatly exaggerated. His hotheaded brother Lincoln Burrows (Dominic Purcell) hunts him down, finding Michael under a different name in a Yemen, where Michael again proves himself to be the smartest, most scheming guy in the room, especially if it's a prison cell. Still, Michael's long reach hasn't spared his ex Sara (Sarah Wayne Callies) or the son who grew up without him, with the prospect that Michael has resurfaced bringing out shadowy figures and hints of a full-blown conspiracy. Although there's an initial kick as the writers reintroduce the various players -- including the ruthless T-Bag (Robert Knepper) Sucre (Amaury Nolasco) and C-Note (Rockmund Dunbar) -- there's a willy-nilly quality to it all, like a high-school reunion where, after the greetings, there's not very much to say. Granted, nobody really watched "Prison Break" for its sobriety. Even so, there's something unsavory about using a war-torn Middle Eastern country as what amounts to a prop backdrop, with the gun-toting bad guys essentially serving as just another impediment for the brilliant Michael to figure out how to circumvent. The original "Prison Break" benefited from a strong sense of purpose, with Michael motivated by his determination to save his brother. By contrast, the only ostensible reason to bring it back at this point is because everyone agreed to do so. Fox has been adept at reviving properties with lingering fan interest, but the results have been almost uniformly disappointing-- most recently with "The X-Files'" tepid comeback. Never let concerns about scripts get in the way of a juicy marketing pitch. On the plus side, this nine-part "event series" is a relatively modest commitment, and the frantic pace provides a few visceral thrills. It's just that for viewers who find those few hours wearing thin, those feeling antsy will find it much easier than Michael and company to engineer their escape. "Prison Break" premieres April 4 at 9 p.m. on Fox.  
1491422952	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/05/politics/kfile-rubio-tillerson-syria-attack/index.html	Rubio: It's no coincidence that Syria gas attack happened after 'concerning' Tillerson comments - CNNPolitics.com	(CNN)Republican Sen. Marco Rubio said Wednesday that he doesn't think it's a coincidence that a suspected chemical weapons attack in Syria occurred shortly after Secretary of State Rex Tillerson suggested Syrian President Bashar Al-Assad could remain in power. "In this case now, we have very limited options and look, it's concerning that the secretary of state, 72 hours ago or a week ago, last Friday, said that the future's up to the people in Syria on what happens with Assad. In essence almost nodding to the idea that Assad was gonna get to stay in some capacity," Rubio said on the show "AM Tampa Bay." "I don't think it's a coincidence that a few days later we see this," Rubio concluded. Dozens died in an attack on Tuesday that activists said was committed by Assad's regime. The U.S. has also placed blame on Assad for the attack. Last week in Turkey, Tillerson said, "I think the status and the longer-term status of President Assad will be decided by the Syrian people." Other lawmakers, such as fellow Republican Sen. John McCain, have also rebuked Tillerson and the Trump administration. McCain said on CNN's "New Day" that he was sure that the Assad regime was "encouraged to know that the United States is withdrawing" from the conflict. In the radio interview, Rubio said he believes Assad will get away with the attack. "Assad believes and sadly he may be right that he can gas his people with sarin, kill children, kill innocent civilians, people will complain, there'll be a meeting at the UN Security Council and then life will go on and he'll stay in power," he said. "He's made that calculation. The Russians support him on it. China is indifferent. And I hate to say this, I think he's gonna get away with it again."  
1491422899	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/05/opinions/mcconnell-nuclear-gorsuch-drucker-opinion/index.html	Why McConnell won't hesitate to go nuclear on Gorsuch (opinion) - CNN.com	David M. Drucker is a Senior Political Correspondent for the Washington Examiner and a CNN Political Analyst. The views expressed in this commentary are solely those of the author. (CNN)Behind the drama that will play out in the Senate over the next several days is the reality that Majority Leader Mitch McConnell took a big risk when he decided to block President Obama from filling the late Antonin Scalia's Supreme Court seat with a liberal justice. And it's likely to pay off for him in the form of the confirmation of Neil Gorsuch. For that reason, and others, McConnell will not hesitate to go nuclear. Scalia passed away on February 13, 2016, the same day as a Republican presidential debate. McConnell anticipated that Donald Trump, and possibly Sen. Ted Cruz of Texas or other candidates, would demand that GOP senators block Obama from replacing the conservative icon, a move that would have tilted the high court to the left. To protect his vulnerable members -- people like Sen. Ron Johnson of Wisconsin, Sen. Pat Toomey of Pennsylvania and Sen. Kelly Ayotte of New Hampshire -- from the political fallout that he believed might ensue, McConnell took the issue off the table by taking the burden on himself. The Kentucky Republican moved swiftly upon Scalia's death to declare any successor nominated to replace him by President Barack Obama dead on arrival. And by DOA, McConnell meant not so much as a hearing in the Judiciary Committee for Merrick Garland, who was center left but hardly a left-wing nut. But as it happened, he created a winning issue for Trump. The real estate tycoon won an Electoral College victory in part because many Republican voters decided that, although their nominee wasn't what they had hoped for, he might keep the court conservative for another generation. After all that, there is just no way McConnell, as Senate Majority Leader, will allow Democrats to block Neil Gorsuch from filling the vacant seat on the Supreme Court. His move was risky. Indeed, there was little guarantee Trump, who at the time was headed to victory in the Republican presidential primary, would defeat Hillary Clinton in November. That left some to wonder, notwithstanding the applause from the GOP base, exactly who McConnell was leaving the seat open for. Then there's the cloud of nuclear option fallout that has hovered over the Senate since November of 2013. That's when Democrat Harry Reid of Nevada, then the Senate Majority Leader, pushed the proverbial button and triggered the so-called nuclear option. Reid applied the change to eliminate use of a filibuster on all executive branch nominees except Supreme Court justices. Changing Senate rules, which are not dictated by the Constitution, requires the approval of 67 senators. The nuclear option is code for "breaking the rules to change the rules," so that only 51 votes are needed to change Senate rules instead. That's what Reid did in 2013, and that's what McConnell will do this week. Maybe Senate Republicans didn't have a right to be outraged in 2013, but they were. Having covered the Senate over the years and witnessed the nuclear meltdown, I can attest that their anger was real and not the kind you see on Capitol Hill from time to time that's manufactured for the cameras. They held a different view of their exercise of the expansive rights of the minority party, allowed under the Senate's self-imposed rules, and how they used that power to check the Obama administration. So their response to Reid's nuclear bomb was more obstruction. Sure, Obama nominees were now greased for confirmation. But nearly every other matter to come before the Senate hit a GOP roadblock. As John Thune of South Dakota, the No. 3 ranking Republican, told me at the time: "We're not going to lie down." And they didn't. Having mustered such indignation over what Republicans refer to as the "Reid rule" and having risked his majority on blocking Garland, McConnell will not let his love for the Senate as an institution (he's a lifer, having begun his career there at 22 as an intern) trump the installation of Neil Gorsuch. That's why, in short order, McConnell will go nuclear and crush the Democratic minority's parliamentary filibuster of the Gorsuch nomination. In McConnell's case, he will finish the job Reid started, implementing a new rule that makes 51 votes all that are required to squash a filibuster of Supreme Court nominees. Asked if he was sure that he had at least 51 of his 52 Republicans prepared to vote to support the effort, McConnell said flatly to my Washington Examiner colleague, Susan Crabtree: "Uh, yeah." At the rate Trump's presidency is going, that might be one of the few tangible accomplishments Republicans have to show for their unexpected 2016 victory. McConnell isn't about to give that up because of a Democratic filibuster.  
1491422639	http://money.cnn.com/2017/04/05/technology/netflix-rating-stars-thumbs/index.html	Netflix ditches star rating system for 'thumbs up, thumbs down' - Apr. 5, 2017	5 stunning stats about Netflix From now on, rating Netflix movies will be a bit like using a dating app. At 9 a.m. ET Wednesday, Netflix's five-star rating system vanished. In its place are "thumbs up" and "thumbs down" buttons. And Netflix will no longer show you a star rating of films you've never seen. Instead, it'll offer a "% Match score" -- which is a prediction of how much you'll enjoy a movie or TV show based on your viewing habits. It doesn't factor in how other users have rated the video. Related: Netflix is testing a 'Skip Intro' button, and viewers love it Netflix said in a promo video about the launch that the stars have been a "misunderstood hero." They've always reflected what Netflix predicts a particular viewer will enjoy -- and they've never represented an average user rating, the company said. "We've all gotten used to star ratings on e-commerce and review apps, where rating contributes to an overall average," Netflix said in a blog post. "In contrast, when people see thumbs, they know that they are used to teach the system about their tastes with the goal of finding more great content." Netflix said that during tests of the thumbs system, it saw a 200% increase in ratings activity. CNNMoney (New York) First published April 5, 2017: 4:03 PM ET
1491422619	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/05/politics/trump-susan-rice-committed-crime/index.html	Offering no evidence, Trump suggests Susan Rice unmasking requests may be criminal - CNNPolitics.com	Washington (CNN)President Donald Trump said former White House National Security Adviser Susan Rice may have committed a crime when requesting to unmask the names of Trump's associates who were incidentally mentioned on intercepted communications during the Obama administration. Speaking to The New York Times Wednesday, Trump said, "I think it's going to be the biggest story." He continued,"It's such an important story for our country and the world. It is one of the big stories of our time." Trump, asked by the Times, if he believed Rice committed a crime, responded, "Do I think? Yes, I think." Trump offered no evidence to back his allegations or any names of other Obama administration officials he said were also involved. He did not suggest that his assertions came from new intelligence reports but said he would explain himself further "at the right time." In response, Erin Pelton, a spokesperson for Rice, told CNN: "I'm not going to dignify the President's ludicrous charge with a comment." Democrats on Capitol Hill blasted Trump. Rep. Adam Schiff, the top Democrat on the House intelligence committee, said that if Trump is going to accuse Rice of a crime, he should make the intelligence public. "If he's going to make accusations of criminality of anyone, he needs to show evidence to support that kind of a charge," Schiff said. "Obviously, that's not something he was either able or willing to do with respect to his accusations against Obama. It's not something I suspect he's going to be able to do with Susan Rice either." Rep. Eric Swalwell, a California Democrat on the intelligence panel, said he views the allegation as an attempt to divert attention from the ongoing probe into Russian contacts. "I don't expect they will (declassify) because I think this is just more obstruction," Swalwell said. "If he has evidence that she committed a crime, he actually can show us what his evidence is. Right now he has a credibility problem because he's been proved wrong a lot. ... This seems nothing more than buying time and obstructionism." Trump did not repeat his claim at a White House news conference shortly after the Times interview. CNN's Jeremy Herb and Tal Kopan contributed to this report. 
1491422350	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/05/politics/kfile-carter-page-trump-russia/index.html	Former Trump adviser Carter Page says he didn't disclose Russian spy contacts to campaign - CNNPolitics.com	(CNN)Carter Page, who advised Donald Trump's presidential campaign on foreign policy, says he did not disclose to the campaign his involvement in a federal investigation into efforts by Russian spies to recruit Americans. BuzzFeed News and ABC News reported on Monday that Page, who Trump named as an adviser on foreign policy in early 2016, was identified in FBI court filings as target of recruitment by three men identified as Russian intelligence agents. Page was never accused in the court filings of having been successfully recruited as a spy. In an email exchange with CNN's KFile, Page said he wouldn't have discussed his involvement in the case with the campaign, citing his background as a naval officer. "Similar to my experience in the Navy such as on USS Alabama, the service I've provided to this country in areas that are classified such as any federal investigation I may have supported is not something that is appropriate to talk about," Page said over email. "Plus it is completely irrelevant. So your conclusion is correct: no mention of any such extraneous details." "There's an old saying we had when I served in the Navy: we do not discuss the presence or absence of nuclear weapons aboard specific ships, submarines, or aircraft," Page wrote to CNN. "Basically, similar principles also apply for any federal investigations that I may or may not have provided support to during my life -- both whatever may have happened a few years ago and anything that might be ongoing more recently," Page added. "It's unfortunate that some people may take steps to betray these principles, but certainly no one on the Trump campaign ever asked me to do so."  
1491422256	http://www.cnn.com/2016/12/26/foodanddrink/abu-dhabi-best-restaurants/index.html	Abu Dhabi restaurants: Where to go for shawarma and more - CNN.com	CNN Travel's series often carries sponsorship originating from the countries and regions we profile. However, CNN retains full editorial control over all of its reports. Read the policy. (CNN)The winter months are by far the best time to visit Abu Dhabi and explore its burgeoning restaurant scene. Though often overshadowed by its cooler sister city, Dubai, Abu Dhabi's understated nature encourages more authentic and less showy eateries. This often means better quality food. Abu Dhabi is also far more walkable than Dubai, thanks to its compact grid layout. Even though some of the best restaurants are tucked away from the main streets, those exploring by foot or by taxi will still find seeking these venues out relatively easy. There's also something for just about every taste and preference. Visitors will find everything from traditional Arabic cuisine to much more unexpected options like Korean and French fare. Here's a roundup of restaurants worth seeking out while exploring the United Arab Emirate's capital: 10 of the best spas in Abu Dhabi Shish Shawerma Order one or two of Shish Shawerma's sandwiches -- chicken or beef -- and take a stroll down the Corniche waterfront as the sun sets to watch Abu Dhabi come alive. Drivers in giant SUVs pull up to give their orders before driving around the block three or four times as their meal is prepared. This is the capital at its most authentic. Though Shish Shawerma offers a more modern and welcoming vibe than the many other traditional shawarma shops that line the city, this in no way means lesser quality. The restaurant also prides itself on baking its own bread. Lighter options include Shish Shawerma salad and tabboule, while kebbeh, moutabbal and mozzarella crepes are also available. Shish Shawerma, Corniche Branch, Behind Corniche Towers, Abu Dhabi; +971 2 650 5576 (More locations on its website) Abu Dhabi: Insider Travel Guide Bu Tahfish Mix freshly caught fish and seafood with local history at the city's iconic Bu Tahfish. The establishment, owned by Radwan Al Tamimi, now in his 70s, first began as a small mobile kiosk close to the Corniche. After paying an unexpected visit in the 1950s, the UAE's founding ruler Sheikh Zayed was so impressed by the quality of food that he helped Al Tamimi expand. The current restaurant now serves up some of the best seafood in town, in a slightly rough around the edges, kitschy nautical-themed dining area, where even the servers wear sailor outfits. Recommended is the prawn soup starter, a creamy and spice-infused dish served with a hearty helping of prawns, and one of the many hot and cold mezzeh options. Fish -- ranging from red snapper and mullet fish to sea bream and hamour -- is cooked several ways: grilled with spices, fried with seasonings or simply grilled on its own. Prices are based on weight. Bu Tahfish, Opposite Al Salama Hospital, Hamdan Street, Tourist Club Area (Al Zahiyah), Abu Dhabi; +971 2 677 7780 Abu Dhabi's best spots according to Instagram stars Sambusek Though Lebanese restaurants are on almost every corner of Abu Dhabi, few match up to the setting of Sambusek. This establishment, located on Al Maraya Island, boasts a large terrace and offers beautiful views out onto Abu Dhabi Island, making for a scenic dinner experience during the cooler months. The menu includes an impressive variety of hot and cold mezzehs, mutabbal and sambusek, all ideal to share as starters or as mains for a lighter meal. Worth trying are the eggplant mutabbal, hummus with tahini, fattoush, spinach fatayer and grilled halloumi cheese. Mains consist mainly of grilled meats, though a few seafood and fish dishes are also available. For a truly traditional Lebanese option, however, there's the shish tawook, a simple dish of grilled chicken breast, marinated with garlic, lemon juice and Arabic spices. Conclude the meal with an Arabic coffee and shisha. Sambusek, Rosewood Abu Dhabi, Al Maryah Island, Abu Dhabi; +971 2 813 5550 Hanoi Naturally The Bun Dau at Hanoi Naturally -- a delicious mix of tofu, rice vermicelli noodles, fresh salad, roasted peanuts, fresh herbs and tangy sauce -- makes for a filling lunch or dinner option. Abu Dhabi isn't, admittedly, the most obvious destination for authentic Vietnamese food. Hanoi Naturally, however, serves up just that, in a cheap and cheerful canteen-style setting. The extensive menu features traditional dishes that offer a blend of fresh ingredients and spices. Equally delightful is the Cha Ca La Vong, Hanoi style turmeric fish fillet served with dill and peanuts on a sizzling hot plate. Meals should be accompanied by a steaming pot of (lightly) sweetened ginger tea. Hanoi Naturally, Khalifa Street, Al Markaziyah, (Opposite NBAD, Near Europa Car), Abu Dhabi; +971 2 626 1112 (See website for more locations) Peppermill Despite the mall setting and somewhat garish ambiance, Peppermill serves up excellent north and south Indian fare. The menu is extensive and dishes vary in spice levels -- even vegetarians are well catered to, an otherwise unusual experience in Abu Dhabi. Favorites include paneer makhanwala, a medium spiced dish of fresh cheese served with creamy tomato gravy, green cardamon and sweet fenugreek. Alternatively, the chicken chettinad offers a south Indian style boneless chicken curry with blended spices and coconut. They go well with a helping of naan, roti or steamed rice on the side. Peppermill, GF, Bawabat Al Sharq Mall, Baniyas, Abu Dhabi; +971 2 585 9581 (See website for more locations) Visitor's guide to the Abu Dhabi Grand Prix Le Beaujolais Visitors who've had their fill of grilled lamb or chicken can head over to Le Beaujolais for French food and friendly service. This tiny bistro, with its cliched French white and red check tablecloths, Parisian-style bar and Théophile Steinlen-esque posters, is an institution among the expat set. Though, like most licensed restaurants in the UAE, it's located in a hotel, the fact that it looks out onto the street offers the feeling of a standalone establishment. Recommended is the coupe standard cut 200 grams Angus beef fillet, served with a hearty portion of pommes frites and the option of pepper, mushroom or red wine sauce (we prefer the red wine sauce). Other dishes include pan fried chicken liver salad, baked mussels and boeuf bourguignon . A raspberry creme brulee rounds off the meal. Le Beaujolais, Mercure Abu Dhabi Centre Hotel, Hamdan Bin Mohammed Street, Abu Dhabi; +971 2 633 3555 Manna Land For a quick helping of Korean cuisine, Manna Land serves up lunch boxes with just the right amount of food for a midday meal. The chicken lunch set has spicy chicken strips, steamed rice and various other items, depending on the day and the mood of the chef. The Bibimbap is also a thing of beauty. It's served in a piping-hot silver pot with rice, seasoned vegetables, meat, an egg and hot pepper paste. All meals are accompanied by six starters, which usually vary (though guests can almost always count on kimchi and spicy tofu squares). Seating options include regular tables or on the floor, traditional style seating with cushions, behind sliding doors where Korean shows are always playing on the televisions. Parking can be a bit of an issue during the week, so it's best to visit on weekends. Manna Land, Muroor Road East Road, (Behind National Bank of Abu Dhabi), Abu Dhabi; +971 2 446 6860 Love in a desert climate: Where to romance in Abu Dhabi  
1491424756	http://www.cnn.com/2014/03/04/travel/best-coffee-cities/index.html	World's best coffee cities: London, Seattle and 6 more - CNN.com	(CNN)Fifteenth-century Arabs were the first to cultivate coffee and a Frenchman was behind the 1843 debut of the world's first commercial espresso machine. There have been a few leaps forward since then. "People are more and more interested in where the beans come from, and how they're harvested and roasted," says New Zealand barista champion Nick Clark of Wellington's Flight Coffee. "There are so many variables involved in producing a great cup of coffee these days, and the industry has had to evolve to meet growing consumer expectations." The world's best coffee cities are those where the coffee isn't just good -- it's great: 1. London Aussies and Kiwis opened the city's first espresso-focused coffee shops (such as Flat White and Kaffeine) a decade ago and they've been popping up across the city ever since. "London still has a long way to go with café service, but in the past five years there's been so much growth, which is a great thing to be part of," says Estelle Bright, head barista at London's Caravan. Local order: Flat white or cappuccino. "London is still in the grip of the flat white craze, but cappuccinos are similarly popular," says Bright. Top shops: East London boasts the highest concentration of quality coffee shops and cafes. Allpress, Climpson & Sons and Caravan are standouts. European food in London: Favorites from each EU country 2. Melbourne "The coffee culture in Melbourne is just incredible," says reigning World Barista Champion Pete Licata, from the United States. Coffee is such an integral part of the Melbourne lifestyle that the city even hosts an annual coffee expo. Local order: Piccolo latte. While lattes, cappuccinos and flat whites remain popular, piccolo lattes (made with less milk so the espresso tastes stronger) are the drink du jour. Top shops: "It's nearly impossible to find a bad cup of coffee in Melbourne," says Licata. For real coffee purists, there's Axil Coffeehouse Roasters in Hawthorn (322 Burwood Road), Auction Rooms in North Melbourne and Dead Man Espresso in South Melbourne. Hidden Secrets Tours runs café culture walks. Sydney: Insider Travel Guide 3. Reykjavik, Iceland After the Dutch, Scandinavians have the highest coffee consumption per capita in the world. While Finns drink the most among Scandinavians, Icelanders are also coffee crazy. "Not too long ago, cafés in Reykjavík were more about the food," says Kristin Thora, a barista at Icelandic institution Kaffitar and reigning National Cupping Champion. "You'd have coffee and cake and didn't mind how the coffee was as long as the cake was good. Then, about 25 years ago, people started to care about how their coffee was served." With Iceland's lack of commercial coffee behemoths, smaller businesses have had a chance to flourish. Now you can hardly walk a city block without passing a coffee shop. Local order: Latte or cappuccino. "Drip coffee is popular in the home, but Icelanders tend go to coffeehouses for espresso-based drinks," says Thora. Top shops: With seven coffee shops and a roaster to its name, Kaffitar is the closest thing Iceland has to a coffee chain. Stofan and Kaffismidja are hipster faves. Iceland's food can be, well, unusual; check out these 10 dishes 4. Rome Coffee is so much a part of Italian culture that you'll rarely encounter a local who doesn't drink it. But believe it or not, it's not always that easy to find a decent espresso in Italy, with critics whispering that Italians have been resistant to adopt modern barista techniques. But with the best of the nation's baristas calling it home, Rome is your best bet for a quality cup. Local order: Espresso. Custom dictates that milky coffees can only be consumed at breakfast, anyway. Top shops: Rosati in Piazza del Popolo, Sant' Eustachi by the Pantheon or Giolitti, a few blocks west of the Trevi Fountain, are crowd favorites. Pilgrimage routes along Italy's Wonder Ways 5. Singapore "Coffee has always been an integral part of Singaporean life, but we've only recently embraced modern espresso technology," says Jovena Loon of Café Hopping Singapore. "Locals have become so obsessed with latte art that it has become a basic criteria for a good café." Local order: Latte, mocha or cappuccino. Top shops: Jovena recommends Strangers' Reunion in Chinatown, Dutch Colony in Pasar Bella marketplace, and Bukit Timah and Chye Seng Huat Hardware in Little India. Singapore Sling gets a makeover 6. Seattle If there's one American city that's consistently ahead of the game, it's Seattle. The green mermaid is only a small part of the hometown coffee scene. "Coffee is our liquid sunshine in Seattle," says Joshua Boyt from Victrola Coffee Roasters, one of the city's best cafes for coffee geeks. "Passion for the product, coupled with the sheer number of coffee shops across the city, has created a culture of constant improvement through competition and camaraderie." Local order: Espresso, cappuccino or a single-origin pour. Top shops: Victrola Coffee Roasters in Capitol Hill, Empire Espresso in Columbia City and Seattle Coffee Works downtown are all solid picks. 7. Vienna, Austria They're such an important part of Viennese culture that the city's coffee houses were listed by UNESCO in 2011 as an Intangible Heritage. But modern coffee connoisseurs such as Vienna coffee blogger Lameen Abdul-Malik of From Coffee With Love admit that the standard of coffee in these beloved institutions, which act as public living rooms where people come to chat, read newspapers and eat strudel, are lagging in terms of coffee technology and service expectations. Perhaps not for long. "Since Vienna hosted the World Barista Championships in 2012, and new-style independent coffee shops began to open up, the quality of espresso drinks is steadily improving," says Abdul-Malik. Local order: Espresso or cappuccino in a new style cafe. Or a Vienner melange (similar to a cappuccino, but usually topped with cream) in a traditional coffeehouse. Top shops: Abdul-Maliuk recommends Caffe Couture, Essenti or Coffee Pirates. Demel serves traditional coffee and marvelous cakes. Vienna: Insider Travel Guide 8. Wellington, New Zealand While the ubiquitous flat white was purportedly invented in Sydney, the drink was perfected in Wellington, where it's become the nation's unofficial national beverage. "Wellington-ites really know their coffee, and there is a very high standard being served around the city," says Clark. "Wellington is also a small city; there's a lot of interaction between consumers and professionals, which helps our industry to improve and grow." Local order: Flat white. It's a religion. Top shops: It's tough to find a bad coffee in New Zealand. Some of Wellington's best coffee shops include Flight Coffee Hangar, Memphis Belle and Lamason Brew Bar. South Island's 13 most beautiful photo ops This article was originally published in March 2014. Check with coffee shops ahead of time before you go. MORE COFFEE TALK: How Norway is changing the way we drink coffee Bonga: Ethiopia's epicenter of Arabica coffee How cappuccino conquered South Africa  
1491424711	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/05/politics/donald-trump-assad-syria-north-korea/index.html	Sobering world crises land on Trump's doorstep - CNNPolitics.com	Washington (CNN)The world's most dire crises are landing at Donald Trump's feet 11 weeks into his presidency, putting a global spotlight on the new US leader and laying bare the still-unformed elements of his foreign policy. At the White House Wednesday, Trump was meeting with a key US ally -- Jordan's King Abdullah II -- and speaking by phone with two others, German Chancellor Angela Merkel and Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe, to explain how his young administration plans to confront a spate of foreign challenges. All three are urgently looking for Trump to more fully articulate what, until now, have been vague proclamations of US policy toward some of the world's most volatile regions. Trump himself offered perhaps the most distilled statement of his driving foreign vision on Tuesday while speaking with a group of union workers in Washington. "I'm not, and I don't want to be, the president of the world," Trump said. "I'm the President of the United States -- and from now on it's going to be America first." Trump has offered that view before, and has made no secret that he's not eager to inject the US into crises he says are someone else's problem. But even as Trump was reiterating his commitment to prioritize US concerns over those of the rest of the world, the issues that keep his foreign counterparts awake at night were flaring. Before he spoke on Tuesday, shocking images of atrocities in Syria prompted outrage -- and finger-pointing -- at the White House. Hours later, North Korea test-launched another ballistic missile, an apparent display of bombast ahead of Trump's highly anticipated summit with Chinese President Xi Jinping in Florida on Thursday and Friday. Trump acknowledged Wednesday that the world's problems were now his. But he offered little explanation for how he planned to confront them. "I now have responsibility, and I will have that responsibility and carry it very proudly," Trump said during a news conference with Abdullah, with whom he huddled earlier in the Oval Office. But asked whether he would take new action, Trump remained coy. "You will see," Trump said. Trump was responding to questions about his response to the chemical attack in Syria, which he said in a written statement Tuesday was partly due to inaction by his predecessor. "These heinous actions by the Bashar al-Assad regime are a consequence of the past administration's weakness and irresolution," he said. Syria Trump's administration offered a pessimistic view on Assad's fate in Syria, citing political realities there as a reason the brutal dictator isn't likely to leave anytime soon. "There is not a fundamental option of regime change, as there has been in the past," White House press secretary Sean Spicer said Tuesday. The lack of options in Syria isn't a new conundrum -- President Barack Obama often cited the country's civil war as the predicament that haunted him most. The Trump administration has mustered the display of outrage that many world partners were seeking, including convening an emergency session at the United Nations Security Council, chaired by US Ambassador Nikki Haley. But the White House's frank admission that Assad would remain in power in Damascus for the foreseeable future was a break from the past, and a reflection that Trump plans to bring US foreign affairs in a new direction. There are few US interests in Syria, and becoming engaged in military conflict there would undoubtedly mean American deaths. Four years after Obama failed to gain support from Congress for a strike on Assad's positions, there remains little appetite for a broader scale American effort there. And Trump, whose transactional views of foreign policy are openly expressed, sees little reason for the US to become more engaged. North Korea But in his conversations with Merkel and Abdullah on Wednesday, Trump will be reminded that the world still looks to US presidents for leadership at moments of crisis. The migrant flood stemming from Syria's civil war has affected both leaders' countries intensely. Both now find themselves partnering with a US leader they fear could be turning away. North Korea's test launch provided another reminder to Trump of the volatile world he inherited in January. Obama warned Trump before he took office that the rogue nation's nuclear program would present him with the most worrisome global challenge. Trump, in the transition period, requested more detailed information about the country's ambitions from the intelligence officials who delivered his initial briefings. Unlike in Syria, where the White House acknowledged that options were slim, administration officials projected a comprehensive plan to confront Pyongyang if the missile tests continue. "The clock has now run out and all options are on the table," one official told reporters Tuesday, pointing to the failure of successive administration's efforts to negotiate an end to North Korea's nuclear program. But in a break from previous practice, Secretary of State Rex Tillerson offered an intentionally curt statement on the launch. "North Korea launched yet another intermediate range ballistic missile," Tillerson said. "The United States has spoken enough about North Korea. We have no further comment." China The test launch came ahead of Trump's summit in Florida this week with the enigmatic and calculating Xi, which will amount to the most important meeting with a foreign leader since Trump took office. Behind the scenes in the West Wing, moderate and hardline aides are competing for Trump's ear as he prepares for the talks, according to multiple US officials familiar with preparation for the meetings. The summit is being closely monitored in both countries after a bumpy start to perhaps the most important bilateral relationship in the world, which will be critical in confronting North Korea's threats. Trump, however, is insistent that partnership with Beijing isn't a requirement for staving off the nuclear threat. "Well, if China is not going to solve North Korea, we will," he told the Financial Times last week. "That is all I am telling you."  
1491424474	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/05/us/lgbt-employees-appeals-court-plaintiff/index.html	Lesbian plaintiff in discrimination suit sticking to fight - CNN.com	(CNN)Kimberly Hively, a lesbian math teacher who filed a bias lawsuit against her former employer in Indiana, didn't know whether to believe the good news from her lawyer that a federal appeals court on Tuesday ruled that the Civil Rights Act protected LGBT employees from workplace discrimination. Hively, 50, said she has heard the word "no" more than "yes" since suing Ivy Tech Community College in 2014, arguing that the school violated Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 when it denied the adjunct instructor full-time employment based on her sexual orientation. "Even though you hope for the best, you try not to get your expectations too high," she said from her home in South Bend, Indiana. "And so this was a yes -- and it was a big yes." The ruling paves the way for Hively's lawsuit to move forward. A different appellate court ruling -- in the 11th Circuit Court of Appeals -- had found that Title VII does not bar claims of discrimination based on sexual orientation, possibly setting the issue up for a Supreme Court review. 'Back where I started' "I am kind of back where I started. I'm back in the same court being allowed to sue for the same reasons I brought up 3 ½ years ago," Hively said. Judge Diane Wood of the 7th Circuit Court of Appeals wrote: "We conclude today that discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation is a form of sex discrimination." Wood also wrote: "Any discomfort, disapproval, or job decision based on the fact that the complainant -- woman or man -- dresses differently, speaks differently, or dates or marries a same-sex partner, is a reaction purely and simply based on sex." "That means that it falls within Title VII's prohibition against sex discrimination, if it affects employment in one of the specified ways," Wood added. Jeff Fanter, a senior vice president at the college, said in a statement: "Ivy Tech Community College rejects discrimination of all types; sexual orientation discrimination is specifically barred by our policies. Ivy Tech respects and appreciates the opinions rendered by the judges of the Seventh Circuit Court of Appeals and does not intend to seek Supreme Court review. The college denies that it discriminated against the plaintiff on the basis of her sex or sexual orientation and will defend the plaintiff's claims on the merits in the trial court." 'Sucking face' Hively said she believes her troubles started in 2009 when she gave her girlfriend a quick goodbye kiss as she went into work as an adjunct instructor at the school. "It was just a kiss in the car like millions of other people do," she said. Shortly after, Hively said she received a call at home from the school administration in response to a complaint that she was "sucking face," and she was reminded of her professionalism. Working on a semester-to-semester basis, Hively said she applied for six to seven full-time teaching and administrative positions after earning a graduate degree in 2011. But she was denied. She said other employees who had been hired after were given full-time work. She also alleged other treatment such as reduced hours. Hively said she was not asked back to the school in 2014 after working there for 14 years. "It was at that point I knew that it was a bigger issue than even I had imagined it might be," said Hively, who now teaches math at a South Bend high school. A battle for legal representation She didn't get a lot of support for her case in Indiana, which is a no-fault employment state with few employment attorneys, she said. Lawyers told her they either didn't practice employment law or wouldn't take the case. One attorney, who turned her down, suggested Hively file the suit herself. Hively asked an attorney friend, who didn't practice employment law, to help her with the language. "It was scary to walk in there after everybody said that it couldn't be done and nobody was willing to step up and help out," she said. "But what they were doing was wrong and I knew it was wrong. So, I couldn't just let it go." She said she hopes the appeals court ruling "gives people pause when they're bullying someone over their sexual orientation." "I'm hoping ... it'll close the gap that was left when the marriage law passed and there was no protection outside of the ability to get married," she said. Hively's case was initially dismissed by a local court, but was eventually taken to the 7th Circuit by Lambda Legal, a nonprofit legal organization that works on cases dealing with the civil rights of LGBT people. A 'game-changer' Greg Nevins, of Lambda Legal, called the decision a "game changer for lesbian and gay employees facing discrimination in the workplace." Hively said she didn't file the lawsuit because she felt she belonged to any community, but rather because she felt she was being bullied at work. "It just so happened that they were using the fact that I was a lesbian to do that," she said. Hively said she never intended to be an advocate and was surprised at how big the case has gotten. Her journey, she said, has "been less about me and more about everybody else who's going to come after me, who's not going to have to take this long walk." "I guess I am as good a spokesperson as the next person," she said. "If I've done nothing else, I've at least stuck to this fight." CNN's Ariane de Vogue contributed to this report. 
1491424336	http://money.cnn.com/2017/04/01/technology/internet-privacy-protection-rules-jon-leibowitz/index.html	Former FTC chief: Privacy fears are 'hyper-partisan hyperbole' - Apr. 1, 2017	Is your internet privacy dead? The fear surrounding Congress's decision to roll-back some Obama-era internet privacy rules is just "hyper-partisan hyperbole," says former Federal Trade Commission chair Jon Leibowitz. Leibowitz headed the FTC under President Obama and now chairs the 21st Century Privacy Coalition, which opposes the rules. The coalition is funded by, among others, broadband providers including Verizon, Comcast and AT&T (whose planned acquisition of CNN's parent company, Time Warner, is under government review). Leibowitz told CNN's Michael Smerconish that Americans still have privacy protections. "It is more accurate to say the status quo will continue," Leibowitz said. In October, the Federal Communication Commission instituted rules that would prevent internet service providers from selling customers' personal information without their consent, and these are the regulations that were overturned last week. Related: Trump supports repeal of Internet privacy protections But Leibowitz said consumers' fears are misplaced. He said other privacy protections are still in place, and violating some of them could subject internet providers to federal enforcement action. Doing away with the FCC rules, Leibowitz said, will allow regulators to implement a new set of rules that can be applied across the entire industry. Right now, he said, the FCC regulates internet service providers, like AT&T (T, Tech30) and Verizon (VZ, Tech30), but the FTC regulates tech firms like Google (GOOG) and Facebook (FB, Tech30). Regulating their privacy practices separately causes confusion for companies and consumers, Leibowitz said, echoing the Republican argument to strip the FCC regulations. Related: Congress just killed your Internet privacy protections And Leibowitz argues those FCC rules are flawed anyway. What's going on in Washington right now, he said, is just overblown politics. "Washington, as we all know, is hyper-partisan these days, and privacy issues -- which should be nonpartisan and were nonpartisan at the FTC -- have become even more partisan. There's a lot of sky-is-falling hyperbole," Leibowitz said. "It'd be great if people could cut through this fact-free environment and talk about real issues," he said. Privacy advocates, consumer groups, members of the tech community and Congressional Democrats disagree. Massachusetts Congressman Michael Capuano was particularly vocal during the House debate on the topic. "What the heck were you thinking? Why would you want to give out any of your personal information to a faceless corporation for the sole purpose of them selling it? Give me one good reason," he said. Trump is expected to sign the bill overturning the FCC privacy rules once it crosses his desk. Correction: An earlier version of this story failed to identify Leibowitz as the chairman of the 21st Century Privacy Coalition, a group that opposes the FCC rules. CNNMoney (New York) First published April 1, 2017: 5:01 PM ET
1491424231	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/05/golf/play-suspended-at-masters-par-3-contest/index.html	Masters 2017: Par 3 Contest canceled - CNN.com	(CNN)For the first time in its history, the Masters Par 3 Contest will not have a winner. Citing inclement weather and safety concerns, the Augusta National Golf Club announced the cancellation of Wednesday's traditional event. "The safety of everyone on our grounds was the determining factor in the decision to close the course and cancel the Par 3 Contest," Billy Payne, chairman of Augusta National, said in a statement. "We share in the disappointment of our patrons, but the safety of everyone on our grounds is always our primary concern." Earlier in the day, the course was evacuated, as a morning wave of storms closed the grounds from 10 a.m until 12:30 p.m. ET. Play started at 12:30 p.m. ET, the same time the gates reopened to patrons. The event originally was scheduled to start at noon. The second and final evacuation came at 1:25 p.m. ET. "The course will be closed for the remainder of the day," the Masters Twitter account said. Only two players, Bubba Watson and Webb Simpson, finished the nine-hole course. No winner was declared. The Par 3 Contest, which has been taking place since 1960, occurs the day before the start of the Masters Tournament. According to the Masters website, tournament participants, noncompeting past champions and honorary Invitees are invited to participate. No Par 3 Contest winner has followed that with a Masters Tournament victory that same week. The 81st edition of the Masters Tournament starts Thursday. CNN's Dan Moriarty contributed. 
1491423658	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/05/opinions/trump-xi-gemini-twins-opinion-hockx/index.html	Trump and Xi: Astrological and political twins (opinion) - CNN.com	Michel Hockx is a Professor of Chinese literature and the Director of the Liu Institute for Asia and Asian Studies at the University of Notre Dame. The views expressed in this commentary are his own. (CNN)It is tempting to think of Trump and Xi as opposites -- in tweets, trade and otherwise -- but whatever divides these two men, what they share in common is both surprising and instructive: mistrust of the media, a longing to restore a nation's lost glory and conservative social views. They also share a Zodiac sign. Trump's birthday is June 14 and Xi's is June 15, making them Geminis, or "twins." So what twinning might we see in the leadership constellation when the two leaders meet later this week in Mar-a-Lago, and perhaps in the years to come? Mistrust of the media: When they meet in a casual setting in Florida, both men can perhaps strike up a conversation about "fake news" on the internet and how they feel it affects them and their countries. Given Trump's position, we are not likely to hear the US President express concern about limited press freedom in China. Xi's policies to prevent "spreading rumors" on the internet have been in place for several years already and, similar to Trump's tweets on the "dishonest" media, they seem to target any negative portrayals of government actions. Restoring a nation's glory: Many Western leaders share the Chinese government's desire to control the internet for the sake of national security. In an age of modern terrorism, governments want to be able to track militants across social media platforms, which often means compromising citizens' privacy. Western and Chinese leaders differ in how they implement this control, but it is a difference of degree, not of principle. Xi and Trump have both placed national security and national development at the top of their agendas, to the extent that Xi's main stated policy aim, "the Great Revival of the Chinese Nation," directly echoes Trump's promise to "make America great again." Xi has promised that this revival will be completed by the year 2049, the 100th anniversary of the founding of the People's Republic. Also referred to as "the Chinese Dream," this policy is all about China maintaining its status as one of the world's wealthiest and most powerful nations and definitively erasing the negative memories of the country's treatment at the hands of Western imperialists from the mid-19th century onward. The policy is meant to inspire national pride and patriotism, and the kind of confident pose toward the outside world that Trump also tries to adopt, whether it's through executive orders or prolonged handshakes. Cultural and social conservatism: Xi's policies are similar to Trump's, not only in their appeal to a patriotic spirit and the revival of a glorious past, but also in their reliance on social and cultural conservatism. Trump has taken up conservative positions on a range of social issues, most notably abortion. He has also criticized those taking progressive positions, especially the media, for being un-American. For Trump and his followers, restoring America's greatness goes hand-in-hand with restoring traditional values. Under Xi, much state funding has been allocated to policies aimed at restoring traditional Confucian values in Chinese society -- an attempt to counterbalance the impact of globalization. Communist Party cadre training schools now devote as much of their curriculum to the study of Confucius as they do to the study of Marx. State propaganda across all media praises traditional Confucian virtues, most of which revolve around the notion of harmonious acceptance of predetermined, unchangeable hierarchies. Here, Marx and his emphasis on struggle and conflict has been left far behind. Generally speaking, Chinese people are more comfortable with Confucian than with Marxist values, and a return to "strong family values" lightens the burden on Xi's budget, since much of the cost of child care and elder care is borne directly by families. The policy especially emphasizes the Confucian concept of "filial piety," stressing children's responsibility to care for their aging parents, an expedient economic move given China's rapidly aging population. Despite the abolition of the one child policy, the replacement fertility rate is only 1.6, well below the 2.0 rate needed to replace each generation with an equally large new one. Conservative gender policy: But both leaders' conservatism isn't limited to the family structure; it extends to gender issues as well. Unlike his US presidential counterpart, whose denigrating remarks about women were widely aired and discussed throughout the presidential campaign, Xi has not been accused of disrespect toward women or misogyny. However, the cultural conservatism of his policies has had a negative effect on the status of women in Chinese society. The harmonious acceptance of predetermined hierarchies in Confucianism clearly favors men over women and husbands over wives, and this, too, has been a major about-turn in comparison with the Marxist past. Women's participation in the workforce in China has gone down from nearly 80% to 64%, although this is still higher than in most Western countries, including the US at 56%. The gender pay gap is also huge, according to figures from Catalyst, with Chinese women on average earning only 65% of what men earn for the same work. The US figure is slightly better at 77%. And an especially noticeable Chinese trend in recent years has been to discourage women from pursuing higher education, since 50% of higher-educated women are currently unmarried. To what extent the shared social and cultural attitudes of these "twins" will help them to find common ground remains to be seen. But we can expect Trump to visit China within the year, and hence the likely lifting, temporary or otherwise, of the Chinese ban on Twitter.  
1491423333	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/05/politics/robot-burns-trump-tweets/index.html	Robot that burns Trump's tweets built by engineer - CNNPolitics.com	(CNN)President Donald Trump's tweets irritated a robotics engineer so much that he built a robot to burn each and every one of them. David Neevel's red robot prints out each tweet on a piece of paper then switches on a lighter, burns it and dispenses the flaming remainders into an ashtray. Neevel has filmed and documented the entire process on Twitter. Neevel shares each tweet-burning video on the the "@burnedyourtweet" Twitter account, along with a message tweeted to @realDonaldTrump that says, "I burned your tweet." The engineer, who is currently working as a freelancer in the Netherlands, told CNN's Jeanne Moos the tweet-burning is a cathartic experience. All the President's tweet (with context) "It's a way to laugh through this, hopefully," he said. "How often do you empty the ashtray?" Moos asked. "About once a day," Neevel said.  
1491423314	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/05/politics/trump-associates-russians-meetings/index.html	One week, three more Trump-Russia connections - CNNPolitics.com	(CNN)In December, Donald Trump's son-in-law and close adviser met privately with the head of a Russian bank under U.S. sanctions. In January, a major Trump donor with ties to his administration flew to a remote island and conferred with a confidant of Russian President Vladimir Putin. And four years ago, a Trump adviser interacted with a Russian spy trying to elicit intelligence. Three revelations in the past week have raised new questions from lawmakers about the Trump team's relations with Russian leaders and broadened Congress's inquiries into whether Trump associates colluded with Russia in its effort to sway the 2016 presidential election. The disclosures of private meetings came as Secretary of State Rex Tillerson, speaking at a NATO meeting, said the U.S. will maintain its sanctions against Russia until Moscow "reverses its actions" in neighboring Ukraine, where it has annexed part of the country. But questions remain about Trump's commitment to the sanctions imposed in 2014 by President Barack Obama, which sources previously have told CNN are on the table for review. Here is a summary of the three previously undisclosed meetings. 1) Erik Prince meets a Russian official in Seychelles The people Erik Prince: Founder of former government security contractor Blackwater; major donor to Trump's presidential campaign; brother of Education Secretary Betsy DeVos; has ties to White House Chief Strategist Steve Bannon Sheikh Mohammed bin Zayed al-Nahyan: Crown prince of Abu Dhabi, capital of the United Arab Emirates, a Persian Gulf nation strongly opposed to Iran Unnamed Russian businessman: Close to Putin The meeting Date: Mid-January 2016, before Trump's inauguration Place: Seychelles, a remote island nation in the Indian Ocean Topic: Zayed arranged a meeting between Prince and the Putin confidant to establish a possible back channel of communications between Moscow and the incoming Trump administration, a diplomatic source tells CNN. Both the White House and a Prince spokesman said Prince had "no role" on the transition team. The Washington Post, which first reported the meeting, reported that the UAE wanted to weaken the alliance between Russia and Iran, a move that would likely "require major concessions to Moscow on U.S. sanctions." NBC News quoted an intelligence source saying the Seychelles meeting focused on U.S. policy in the Middle East. The question Why did Prince hold the meeting? How much influence does he have with the Trump administration? The significance During the transition, Prince met with members of Trump's incoming national-security team, two sources tell CNN contributor Carl Bernstein. Prince also boasted during the transition about the influence he had with the administration, the sources said. A Prince spokesman said in a statement that the meeting "had nothing to do with President Trump" but did not explain the purpose of the meeting. Both the White House and a diplomatic source tell CNN that the administration was not involved in arranging the meeting. If Trump officials knew of or sanctioned Prince's meeting, that raises new questions about Trump's agenda for Russia and about any ties between Trump associates and the Kremlin. A push to separate Russia from its Middle East ally might require lifting or easing sanctions against Russia, which would face strong opposition from Europe and Congress, where there is strong bipartisan support for sanctions. 2) Jared Kushner meets a Russian banker in New York The people Jared Kushner: Son-in-law and close adviser to Trump Sergey Gorkov: Chairman of Russian state-run development bank, Vnesheconombank (VEB), which is under U.S. sanctions; appointed to job by President Vladimir Putin The meeting Date: December 2016 Place: New York City Topic: This is disputed. The White House says Kushner was acting as an adviser to President-elect Trump during the transition period and was a "conduit" to world leaders until Trump named a Secretary of State. The bank says Gorkov met with Kushner as he was meeting with banking and business officials worldwide to discuss a new strategic plan for the financially troubled bank. The question Why did Kushner meet with a Russian banker whose bank is under U.S. sanctions? The significance If Kushner and Gorkov discussed sanctions, their meeting would raise the prospect that Trump would lift the sanctions, a move he said during the campaign that he would consider. There is no indication that Kushner and Gorkov discussed sanctions. Several Russian banks - but not VEB - have been lobbying to lift or ease the sanctions since they were imposed. After the meeting was reported, Kushner volunteered to speak to Congressional committees that are investigating Russia's election activities and any ties between Trump associates and the Kremlin. Sen. Lindsay Graham, a Republican of South Carolina, questioned why Kushner would meet with a banker. "I think he needs to explain himself," Graham told the Today Show on March 28. 3) Carter Page meets a Russian spy in New York The people Carter Page: Former foreign policy advisor to Trump campaign who advocated warmer relations with Russia and criticized U.S. sanctions; has business ties to Russia through his consulting firm, which focuses on oil and gas in Russia and former Soviet republics; invested in Gazprom, a large Russian natural-gas company. Victor Podobnyy: A New York City-based Russian spy working out of Russia's mission to the United Nations from December 2012 The meeting Date: Early 2013 Place: New York City Topic: While Page was running his energy-consulting business, he met Podobnyy at an energy symposium in New York City. Thinking Podobnyy worked for Russia's U.N. mission, Page maintained contact with him, exchanging emails about the energy business and occasionally meeting, according to court records. At one meeting, Carter gave Podobnyy documents about the energy business. Podobnyy was trying to cultivate Carter - and others in New York City - as an intelligence source for information about energy development and U.S. sanctions against Russia, according to court records. The question Do Page's interactions with Podobnyy signal any connection between him and the Kremlin? The significance Russian efforts to get intelligence from Page show the sensitivity of his energy-consulting work in Russia and his desirability to Russian intelligence operatives. Page is one of four former Trump campaign associates the FBI is investigating for contacts with Russians known to U.S. intelligence. While Page's interactions with Podobnyy are a clear example of contact with a Russian spy, Page said in a statement that he believed Podobnyy was"a junior attaché at the Permanent Mission of the Russian Federation to the United Nations." In addition, the contact occurred three years before Page became associated with the Trump campaign - and association that both Page and Trump have minimized. Page said in a statement that he gave Podobnyy "nothing more than a few samples" from detailed lectures he gave at New York University for a course about energy markets and politics. In 2015, federal prosecutors charged Podobnny and two other Russian spies with failing to register as "foreign agents" with the U.S. government. But because he was assigned to Russia's U.N. mission, Podobnny received diplomatic immunity and left the U.S. without facing the charges, according to court records. Additional reporting by Jim Sciutto 
1491424959	http://money.cnn.com/2017/04/05/news/economy/ivanka-trump-china-shoes/index.html	Ivanka Trump 'is a very good client,' Chinese shoe manufacturer says - Apr. 5, 2017	Inside the Chinese firm that makes Ivanka Trump shoes For at least one Chinese company, the Trump family is good for business. While President Donald Trump promises tough talking on trade when he meets his Chinese counterpart Xi Jinping this week, his daughter's clothing brand continues to take advantage of the country's low cost production. "Ivanka is a very good client," said Zhang Huarong, chairman of Huajian Group, whose factories churn out millions of shoes for Western brands, including Ivanka Trump. "But of course, I never imagined Ivanka's father would become president." Powered by SmartAsset.com SMARTASSET.COM CNN was allowed to visit one of the company's plants in China's manufacturing heartland. But a request to see the factory where Ivanka Trump shoes are made was denied, partly because the brand doesn't want to publicize its China operations, according to Zhang. Related: Ivanka Trump's stake in D.C. hotel renews ethics questions That might have something to do with President Trump's frequent denunciations of what he calls China's unfair economic practices. On the campaign trail, he threatened to impose heavy tariffs on Chinese goods and pressure China over its currency in order to keep jobs and factories in the U.S. A representative for Ivanka Trump's brand didn't respond to a request for comment. It already became embroiled in a political firestorm in February after the U.S. president attacked Nordstrom department stores for dropping his daughter's line of clothing and accessories. Ivanka Trump said in January she was stepping down from the management of her clothing and accessories business, but she kept her ownership stake and moved the assets into a trust. The situation became more complicated after the announcement last week that she was taking an official position in the White House. Her lawyer, Jamie Gorelick, told CNNMoney last month that Ivanka Trump would recuse herself from certain policy matters, like trade agreements specific enough to affect her line of clothing and accessories. Related: Ivanka Trump sales boom in February Big tariffs on Chinese-made goods could create a headache for her brand. Its supplier, Huajian, will be paying close attention to U.S. trade policy. Huajian produces 12 million pairs of shoes each year, nearly all of them bound for American ports. Most of its workers put in 10-hour days, six days a week. Some of them earn about $400 a month polishing the soles of shoes that typically sell for at least $100 a pair in the U.S. Workers at a Huajian shoe factory in southern China. CNN wasn't permitted to visit the factory where Ivanka Trump shoes are made. Many experts say that if President Trump puts the squeeze on Chinese manufacturers, it's unlikely to bring jobs back to the U.S. "It's not a binary choice," said Ben Schwall, an American businessman with decades of experience in China. "It's not China or America. There's a lot of in between." Related: Trump's tough talk on China is about to run into hard reality Schwall, who helps U.S. businesses produce goods overseas, said low-skilled manufacturing jobs are already moving to countries such as Bangladesh and Vietnam, where costs are even lower. And if President Trump ever follows through on his threat to slap punishing tariffs on Chinese goods, Zhang has a Plan B for Ivanka's shoes. "When the cost becomes too high in China, I would move my production to Africa," he said. CNNMoney (Dongguan, China) First published April 5, 2017: 4:42 PM ET
1491424893	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/05/politics/congress-syria-trump-reaction/index.html	Lawmakers to Trump: Time to act on Syria - CNNPolitics.com	Washington (CNN)Republican lawmakers are ramping up their calls for the Trump administration to act against Syrian President Bashar al-Assad in the wake of Tuesday's chemical attack that killed dozens. Many Democrats, too, are pressing for actions like creating a no-fly zone and trying to bring war crimes charges against the Syrian leader. The calls are coming from many of the same lawmakers in both parties who for years urged President Barack Obama to do more to arm Syrian rebel groups and to strike the Assad regime, and now say that it's Trump's turn to act to remove Assad from power. "I don't think there is a future with Bashar al-Assad in existence," Republican Rep. Adam Kinzinger of Illinois said on CNN's "New Day." "That is something that this administration, frankly, like the last one I think failed to do -- they did in words but not in deeds — this administration is going to have to come to that reality or this problem is sadly only going to continue and get worse." On Tuesday, the Trump administration blamed Syria's attack on the Obama administration's failure to act against Assad. But at a news conference Wednesday, President Donald Trump said he is now responsible for the situation, and suggested he was considering taking additional action. RELATED: Syrian chemical attack victims gassed as they slept "I will tell you that attack on children yesterday had a big impact on me, big impact," Trump said from the White House Rose Garden. "And I have that flexibility. And it's very, very possible, and I will tell you it's already happened that my attitude toward Syria and Assad has changed very much." US Ambassador to the United Nations Nikki Haley also suggested Wednesday at a UN meeting that the US could be "compelled to take our own action." The statements earned praise from Arizona Sen. John McCain, who has been critical of the Trump administration's actions in Russia. McCain also defended Trump for blaming the attack on his predecessor. "Think those were excellent words," McCain said when asked about Trump's statement. RELATED: Trump: 'I now have responsibility' when it comes to Syria "They did chemical attacks," he continued. "Barack Obama did worse than nothing. He said he was going to do something and then didn't. And that clearly gave Bashar Assad license to kill again." But the comments from Trump and Haley were a shift from a week ago, when Secretary of State Rex Tillerson said the Syrian people would determine Assad's fate. Sen. Marco Rubio of Florida said Tillerson's remarks could have given Assad motivation to launch the latest attack. "My belief that if you're Bashar al-Assad and you read that it is no longer a priority of the United States to have you removed from power, I believe that that is an incentive to act with impunity," Rubio said at a news conference. McCain and Sen. Lindsey Graham of South Carolina met with Tillerson for an hour at the State Department on Tuesday, and McCain said Tillerson was being misinterpreted. "He said to me he realizes we've got to take action against these elements that are committing war crimes as we speak," McCain said. Graham told CNN the Trump administration needs to make clear what its policy is when it comes to Assad. "I'd be a disaster if it's a policy change, as bad as drawing the red line," Graham said. RELATED: Haley: If UN won't act on Syria, US may For many Democrats, Tuesday's chemical attack was the latest evidence that a safe zone is needed in Syria to protect civilians. "I think we should establish some kind of a safe zone in Syria where this humanitarian aid can be delivered to the Syrian people and with military protection for the safe zones so that, if anybody tries to mess with it, they will regret it," Virginia Sen. Tim Kaine said on CNN's "New Day." Kaine was one of a group of Democrats who were also pushing the Obama administration to take similar action against Assad. But Kaine dismissed Trump's accusations that Obama could be blamed for the chemical attack. "He's commander in chief. And when something happens and he tries to blame President Obama, give me a break," Kaine said. "And remember, when President Trump was just Donald J. Trump back then, he was urging President Obama not to do anything in Syria." Not all members of Congress condemned Assad. Speaking on CNN's "At This Hour" with Kate Bolduan, Rep. Thomas Massie, a Kentucky Republican, told the host that he didn't think the Syrian leader launched the attack, and that further intervention by the US government may aggravate the situation. "Frankly, I don't think Assad would have done that," Massie said. "It does not serve his interests." CNN's Eleanor Mueller and Ashley Killough contributed to this report. 
1491425719	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/05/middleeast/syria-airstrike-idlib-how-it-unfolded/index.html	From airstrike to aftermath: How Syria attack unfolded - CNN.com	Editor's Note: This article contains extremely graphic images of dead children. All times are local. Nightmarish accounts continue to filter out of Khan Sheikhoun, the northern Syrian town still reeling from what is feared to be the deadliest chemical attack in the country in years. Investigations are underway to determine who was responsible for the Tuesday morning attack that left at least 70 dead, according to activists. This is how it unfolded, based on eyewitness accounts provided to CNN. 6:30 a.m.: Airstrike hits town center, chemical agent suspected An airstrike hit the town center of Khan Sheikhoun, emitting a "poisonous gas," Anas al-Diab, an activist with the Aleppo Media Center (AMC) says. Casualties are reported to have died from asphyxiation caused by exposure to an unknown gas or chemical agent. The injured are initially treated at a makeshift clinic near the scene and Al-Rahma hospital, among others. Doctors Without Borders medics who visit the area's hospitals later say some victims appear to have symptoms consistent with exposure to a neurotoxic agent "such as Sarin gas or similar compounds." Three more strikes reported Five minutes later, three additional strikes reportedly hit the town center, al-Diab says. This time there are no descriptions of gas. At this point it is unclear if the planes involved are Syrian, but the rebel-held city is regularly targeted from the air by the Syrian military and its ally, Russia. Russia later denies having warplanes in the vicinity. Casualties arrive at hospital Warning: This section contains extremely graphic images of dead children. Fares al-Jundi, a doctor who lives in a nearby village, hurries to the Maarat al-Numan hospital immediately after the airstrikes. "I've never seen anything like it, beyond description," he tells CNN as he describes the horrifying scenes. Al-Jundi estimates up to 500 people have been brought in; the wounded cover entire floors, from the patients' rooms and operating theaters and any remaining space in the corridors. "I believe this horrible memory will stay with me for the rest of my life," he continues. Chaos on the ground Hadi al Abdullah, an activist journalist, arrives on scene two hours after the initial attack. Abdullah, who is suffering from blurred vision, a splitting headache and lethargy -- common side-effects of exposure to nerve gas -- says the scene is chaotic. He tells CNN that that people were not initially aware of the presence of a toxic agent. Some who rushed to help are overwhelmed by the gas, including several members of the Syrian Civil Defense (SCD), or White Helmets, who have to be rescued by others from the group. Abdullah says around 30 wounded people have gone to Turkey for treatment. Hospitals targeted in follow-up airstrikes, activists say The makeshift clinic and Al-Rahma hospital, where the injured are being triaged, are targeted in new airstrikes four hours after the chemical attack, Idlib's health directorate and the SCD say in a joint press release. Videos emerge on social media Videos, which appear to be from the scene, are posted quickly to social media platforms. Mohammed Hardan, who works for AMC, says he was at al-Rahma hospital when it was targeted by aerial bombardment, posting footage of the incident hours later. White Helmets: Residents targeted by poison gas Warning: This section contains graphic images of dead children. The White Helmets say at least 50 people, including women and children, have been killed by "poisonous gases." 70 dead, activists say AMC activists say the Syrian regime is behind the attack and says at least 70 people are dead. It adds that 45 bodies have been identified so far. Syrian army denies chemical attack On Tuesday evening, Syrian President Bashar al-Assad's military "categorically denies" using chemical weapons and blames "terrorist" groups for the carnage. But many in the international community blame the Assad regime for the outrage. WEDNESDAY: Turkey says it has evidence of chemical attack Recep Akdag, Turkey's Health Minister, tells Turkish media: ''We have findings that suggest there was a chemical attack. We are sending these findings to World Health Organization as well after documenting them. Humanity should not remain insensitive to this issue." Turkey's Health Ministry later says 29 victims are being treated at six hospitals, and that three victims have died after their arrival. Survivors recall the horror Survivors who made it to the Reyhanli Hospital on the Turkey-Syria border say they saw a plane drop chemical bombs. Mazin Yusif, 13, tells CNN that he found his grandfather slumped over in front of his house shortly after the strike and ran for help. "I got dizzy and then fainted in front of my grandfathers garage. I next found myself here in this hospital, naked in a bed," he adds. 31-year-old Ahmed Abdel Rahim was also caught up in the strike. "I was in my house," he tells CNN. "I had difficulty breathing, but I feel better now. But I did throw up after getting to the hospital. I don't know if my family is dead or alive. I don't know anything." Syrians began burying their dead on Wednesday. A father CNN spoke to said he lost 25 members of his family, including his wife and 9-month-old twins. "My brothers, their children, and their cousins. Around 25 members of my family, all martyred," Abdul Hamid Youssef said, sobbing. CNN's Ben Wedeman, Kareem Khadder, Schams Elwazer, Elizabeth Roberts, Eyad Kourdi, Tamara Qiblawi, Angela Dewan, Eliza Mackintosh and Euan McKirdy contributed to this report. 
1491425483	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/05/entertainment/shia-labeouf-man-down-ticket/index.html	Shia LaBeouf film sells one ticket in U.K. - CNN.com	(CNN)Will the one person who purchased a ticket to see Shia LaBeouf's new war movie please step forward? "Man Down" opened in the UK this weekend, and Variety reported that only one ticket was purchased. The film screened at a single theater, Reel Cinema in Burnley, England, and according to the cross platform measurement company ComScore, raked in £7, or about $8.70. "Man Down" was also released on demand at the same time and will be out on DVD and Blu-ray next month. The film stars LaBeouf as a Marine who searches for his estranged son after returning from a tour of Afghanistan. It was released in limited theaters stateside in December 2016.  
1491425367	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/05/us/severe-weather/index.html	Storms in Southeast: Tornado, flash-flood warnings issued across Georgia - CNN.com	(CNN)The National Weather Service issued tornado and flash-flood warnings for counties across Georgia on Wednesday afternoon as a system of storms barreled through the Southeastern United States. The storms were expected to leave nearly 60 million people at risk of tornadoes, damaging winds, thunderstorms and flooding, according to a CNN forecast. The severe weather threatened residents of Alabama, Florida, Georgia and South Carolina, and is expected to move into the Ohio and Tennessee valleys, according to the National Weather Service. The agency issued a tornado watch, which means that conditions are favorable for severe weather, for a broad area stretching from Alabama up into Indiana. A tornado emergency was issued for Webster and Sumter Counties in Georgia earlier Wednesday. In Sumter county, a tornado up to a mile and a half wide was spotted, county emergency management director Nigel Poole told CNN. "We are still taking cover and actively watching the storm," Poole said. "There have been reports of damage, but we have not been able to access them yet." Molly Chrisman, a student at the University of South Carolina, posted video of her Uber driver out in flooded streets in Columbia. Strong winds and baseball-size hail were expected in parts of Alabama, where Gov. Robert Bentley declared a state of emergency ahead of the weather event. Jake Reed, a meteorologist for CNN affiliate WHNT-TV in Huntsville, Alabama, issued a stark warning on Facebook, saying it was "far and away the biggest threat Alabama has seen in quite some time." In Georgia, there was a chance for isolated tornadoes and hail, National Weather Service meteorologist Matthew Sena told CNN. Metro Atlanta was hit by a deluge of rain. Flash-flood warnings were issued for several counties surrounding Atlanta and Athens to the east. A flash-flood watch was issued for area across northern Georgia. At the Masters golf tournament in Augusta, Georgia, the Par 3 Contest was canceled due to the inclement weather. In addition, the Federal Aviation Administration issued a ground stop for flights at Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport. The ground stop was lifted in the afternoon, but delays are expected as the storm hits the area. CNN's Haley Brink, Christina Zdanowicz, Dave Hennen and Tony Marco contributed to this report. 
1491425320	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/05/politics/republican-faltering-health-care/index.html	Republicans to leave town without health care deal - CNNPolitics.com	Washington (CNN)No deal on legislation to repeal and replace Obamacare is expected before lawmakers head home for a two-week break, putting a cap for now on the on-again, off-again talks that have divided the Republican party. A senior administration source and two senior GOP congressional aides acknowledged that there's no agreement. And House lawmakers tell CNN they're not changing their travel plans and will leave Washington on Thursday. RELATED: More than half of Americans approve of Obamacare now, Gallup poll finds The effort to revive the health care bill that faltered late last month manifested itself in a series of closed-door meetings involving Vice President Mike Pence, White House officials and key GOP lawmakers. The overall dynamics, however, never changed. Conservatives are set on their wish list and Republicans centrists have made clear those requests go too far. But the way lawmakers and the Trump White House have found themselves in the same exact box canyon they wallowed in as the initial iteration of "repeal and replace" imploded less than two weeks ago is illustrative of complexity that continues to dominate -- and plague -- this internal debate. Asked for a status check in the wake of the more than two-hour Tuesday evening affair, one GOP official directly involved was blunt: "No closer to a final deal than we were 24 hours ago, and actually, quite possibly further away than we've ever been." What's driving the current impasse? Confusion. Conservatives in the House Freedom Caucus said Monday night they'd been told very specific things were placed on the table by Pence and Office of Management and Budget Director Mick Mulvaney: Giving states the option of applying for waivers to opt out of three central Obamacare requirements -- essential health benefits,community rating and guaranteed issue. What does that mean? Well, these areas have been identified as crucial by conservatives to reaching their ultimate -- and repeatedly (and repeatedly and repeatedly) stated -- goal: lowering premiums. And that's likely true -- the essential health benefits provision forms the federal floor of what each insurance plan must contain. The guaranteed issue and community rating measures protect those with pre-existing conditions because they require insurers to sell policies to all enrollees, but bar them from charging higher prices to those with health conditions. Community rating also prevents insurers from charging women more. RELATED - More insurers abandon Obamacare. Who might be next? The trade off in providing more robust coverage to individuals regardless of their health status is an increase in the cost of plans. In a sense, these changes would directly undercut Republicans' promise to keep Obamacare's protections for those with pre-existing conditions. But conservatives counter that other provisions in the GOP plan, specifically high risk pools funded run by states but seeded with federal money, would essentially back fill the removal of those regulations, should states opt out. But that's a very, very tough sell to the moderates in the conference, who, according to several who spoke privately with CNN, fear the fallout of including those three opt-out measures in any plan. While amenable to the idea of giving states the option of opting out of essential health benefits, how easily states obtain a waiver remains an open -- and exceedingly important -- question. On top of that, several sources involved in the process said moderates were caught off guard by the news that the other two regulations were on the table. What happened inside last night's meeting? Talk. And lots of it. But there was limited, if any, progress on the thorniest issues: those regulations the White House is explicitly putting on the table in an effort to navigate a compromise. Instead, the discussion settled primarily on the structure and purpose of state run high risk pools, and the possibility of sending more money in that direction via atop the currently allotted $115 billion for a state stability fund. House Energy and Commerce Committee staff briefed on the technical side of everything and circulated some of their own language. But the risk pools were always an accepted area of general agreement. Their inability to even substantively dig in on the key outstanding issues, at least in a way where they start chopping away at the areas of disagreement, "tells you all you need to know about this meeting," one participant said. What was the red flag that things weren't moving forward Tuesday night? There was no legislative text put to the table by the White House. While House GOP staff brought, and circulated, technical language to try and bring members along, even those staffers appeared unclear about what was actually put on the table by the White House, according to one participant involved in the process. Freedom Caucus members insist they're open to the proposal put on the table by Pence and Mulvaney. But member after member from the group say the actual legislative language is crucial and no decisions will be made by the group until that has been put on the table. RELATED: Republicans still searching for a plan B on health care The absence of that language last night was identified as a red flag by participants in all sides of the debate -- and central to the roadblocks that still exist. "I want to make sure I'm clear: there were no agreements tonight," Rep. Mark Meadows, the North Carolina Republican who chairs the Freedom Caucus, told reporters. "There was a general agreement that the progress we're making is really progress." What now? More talk. And now, two weeks at home. Lawmaker after lawmaker, seemingly in a coordinated fashion, emerged from the meeting after 10:30 p.m. ET Tuesday noting that "good progress" had been made. The same players are planning to meet again Wednesday in an effort to hash out agreement on the most difficult issues -- those insurance regulations. But early-week optimism that perhaps a path forward was clearing and, quite possibly, they were on their way to a House floor vote this week, has been decimated. Outside conservative groups, who have stuck firmly behind -- and helped drive -- the Freedom Caucus efforts were preparing to launch a broadside against the party's moderates on Wednesday for standing in the way of what they view as a clear compromise. Majority Leader Kevin McCarthy, R-California, made a surprise visit to the Tuesday meeting which otherwise boasted a grand total of zero participants that came from the party's leadership. But as he departed, he made clear that while lawmakers and the administration were still pushing forward on a bill, it would be "difficult to finish one by the end of the week." The House is currently scheduled to start its two-week Spring recess on Thursday afternoon. As one senior GOP aide involved in the first go-round of "repeal and replace" put it: "Welcome to reality." CNN's Lauren Fox, Deirdre Walsh and Ashley Killough contributed to this report. 
1491426252	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/05/opinions/trump-xi-gemini-twins-opinion-hockx/index.html	Trump and Xi: Astrological and political twins (opinion) - CNN.com	Michel Hockx is a Professor of Chinese literature and the Director of the Liu Institute for Asia and Asian Studies at the University of Notre Dame. The views expressed in this commentary are his own. (CNN)It is tempting to think of Trump and Xi as opposites -- in tweets, trade and otherwise -- but whatever divides these two men, what they share in common is both surprising and instructive: mistrust of the media, a longing to restore a nation's lost glory and conservative social views. They also share a Zodiac sign. Trump's birthday is June 14 and Xi's is June 15, making them Geminis, or "twins." So what twinning might we see in the leadership constellation when the two leaders meet later this week in Mar-a-Lago, and perhaps in the years to come? Mistrust of the media: When they meet in a casual setting in Florida, both men can perhaps strike up a conversation about "fake news" on the internet and how they feel it affects them and their countries. Given Trump's position, we are not likely to hear the US President express concern about limited press freedom in China. Xi's policies to prevent "spreading rumors" on the internet have been in place for several years already and, similar to Trump's tweets on the "dishonest" media, they seem to target any negative portrayals of government actions. Restoring a nation's glory: Many Western leaders share the Chinese government's desire to control the internet for the sake of national security. In an age of modern terrorism, governments want to be able to track militants across social media platforms, which often means compromising citizens' privacy. Western and Chinese leaders differ in how they implement this control, but it is a difference of degree, not of principle. Xi and Trump have both placed national security and national development at the top of their agendas, to the extent that Xi's main stated policy aim, "the Great Revival of the Chinese Nation," directly echoes Trump's promise to "make America great again." Xi has promised that this revival will be completed by the year 2049, the 100th anniversary of the founding of the People's Republic. Also referred to as "the Chinese Dream," this policy is all about China maintaining its status as one of the world's wealthiest and most powerful nations and definitively erasing the negative memories of the country's treatment at the hands of Western imperialists from the mid-19th century onward. The policy is meant to inspire national pride and patriotism, and the kind of confident pose toward the outside world that Trump also tries to adopt, whether it's through executive orders or prolonged handshakes. Cultural and social conservatism: Xi's policies are similar to Trump's, not only in their appeal to a patriotic spirit and the revival of a glorious past, but also in their reliance on social and cultural conservatism. Trump has taken up conservative positions on a range of social issues, most notably abortion. He has also criticized those taking progressive positions, especially the media, for being un-American. For Trump and his followers, restoring America's greatness goes hand-in-hand with restoring traditional values. Under Xi, much state funding has been allocated to policies aimed at restoring traditional Confucian values in Chinese society -- an attempt to counterbalance the impact of globalization. Communist Party cadre training schools now devote as much of their curriculum to the study of Confucius as they do to the study of Marx. State propaganda across all media praises traditional Confucian virtues, most of which revolve around the notion of harmonious acceptance of predetermined, unchangeable hierarchies. Here, Marx and his emphasis on struggle and conflict has been left far behind. Generally speaking, Chinese people are more comfortable with Confucian than with Marxist values, and a return to "strong family values" lightens the burden on Xi's budget, since much of the cost of child care and elder care is borne directly by families. The policy especially emphasizes the Confucian concept of "filial piety," stressing children's responsibility to care for their aging parents, an expedient economic move given China's rapidly aging population. Despite the abolition of the one child policy, the replacement fertility rate is only 1.6, well below the 2.0 rate needed to replace each generation with an equally large new one. Conservative gender policy: But both leaders' conservatism isn't limited to the family structure; it extends to gender issues as well. Unlike his US presidential counterpart, whose denigrating remarks about women were widely aired and discussed throughout the presidential campaign, Xi has not been accused of disrespect toward women or misogyny. However, the cultural conservatism of his policies has had a negative effect on the status of women in Chinese society. The harmonious acceptance of predetermined hierarchies in Confucianism clearly favors men over women and husbands over wives, and this, too, has been a major about-turn in comparison with the Marxist past. Women's participation in the workforce in China has gone down from nearly 80% to 64%, although this is still higher than in most Western countries, including the US at 56%. The gender pay gap is also huge, according to figures from Catalyst, with Chinese women on average earning only 65% of what men earn for the same work. The US figure is slightly better at 77%. And an especially noticeable Chinese trend in recent years has been to discourage women from pursuing higher education, since 50% of higher-educated women are currently unmarried. To what extent the shared social and cultural attitudes of these "twins" will help them to find common ground remains to be seen. But we can expect Trump to visit China within the year, and hence the likely lifting, temporary or otherwise, of the Chinese ban on Twitter.  
1491426108	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/05/politics/navy-t-45-training-jet-fleet-pause/index.html	Navy puts 'safety pause' on trainer jet fleet - CNNPolitics.com	(CNN)The US Navy has implemented a "safety pause" for its fleet of T-45 training jets, according to a US official, a move that comes just days after more than 100 instructional pilots refused to fly in protest of continuing issues with the aircraft's oxygen system. The two-day temporary grounding of all T-45 Goshawks will give Navy officials time to assess the concerns related to the rising rate of "physiological episodes" affecting pilots. Reported physiological episodes resulting in dizzyness or even blackouts have been caused by oxygen contamination, human factors -- including air sickness and vertigo, failure of the on-board oxygen generation system and the failure of other key systems -- according to testimony last week from Rear Adm. Michael Moran. The number of physiological episodes affecting T-45 pilots per year has quadrupled since 2012, according Moran, a troubling trend that has also been identified in Navy pilots who fly F-18s and EA-18G Growlers. But determining the root cause of the issue is complicated by the fact that more than one factor can be attributed to a single physiological event. Instructional pilots started to boycott training flights last Thursday, after raising concerns that commanders were not doing enough to fix the urgent safety problem despite being informed of the risk. And a US defense official told CNN that some Navy officers had been covering up the pilots' initial refusal to fly by citing technical and other issues with the aircraft, raising questions about a breakdown in the chain of command. Fox News first reported the pilots' decision not to fly, a move that essentially led to the grounding of hundreds of training flights. After being questioned on the issue, Adm. John Richardson reiterated the Navy's commitment to resolving the issue during testimony before the House Armed Services Committee Wednesday, calling it the "the top safety priority for naval aviation." "It's a complex problem and requires a multidimensional solution, first and foremost is the human dimension and communication," Richardson said, downplaying disagreement between instructional pilots and senior officers as a "breakdown in communication." "We are making sure that we are listening and they all feel like they can be talking to leadership so we understand where their anxiety and concerns are," he added. The Navy has also developed training to make sure pilots recognize the symptoms of hypoxia and understand the appropriate emergency procedures. Hypoxia results from deficiency in the amount of oxygen delivered to cells and can induce potentially fatal complications. But frustration over the lack of a permanent solution led to last week's boycott and Wednesday's two-day pause. "That's a pretty serious thing when pilots say they're not going to fly," Rep. Martha McSally, an Arizona Republican who questioned Richardson about the issue, told CNN following Wednesday's hearing. "To get to the point where you have them saying we're not flying and we don't think our leadership is listening, which is what you're hearing out of these pilots ... that's pretty severe," McSally, a former Air Force pilot, added. CNN's Jeremy Herb contributed to this report. 
1491426052	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/04/golf/rory-mcilroy-think-twice-about-playing-with-donald-trump-again/index.html	Rory McIlroy would 'think twice' about playing with Trump again - CNN.com	(CNN)Rory McIlroy previously has taken heat for playing golf with President Donald Trump. On Tuesday in Augusta, Georgia, ahead of the Masters, the four-time major champion said he would "think twice" about playing golf with the President again. "Whenever an invitation or a request comes my way, I don't want to say I jump at the chance, but at the same time, you know, to see the Secret Service, to see the scene, I mean, that's really what I was going for," McIIroy said in his session with the media. "I mean, there was not one bit of politics discussed in that round of golf. He was more interested talking about the grass that he just put on the greens. But, yeah, look, it's a difficult one. I felt I would have been making more of a statement if I had of turned it down. It was not a tough place to be put in, but it was a round of golf and nothing more. "Would I do it again? After the sort of backlash I received, I'd think twice about it." Masters starts Thursday McIlroy, who is from Northern Ireland, played golf with Trump in February. Shortly after, saying he was called a "fascist" and a "bigot," McIlroy defended his decision, saying in a statement on Twitter it "wasn't an endorsement nor a political statement of any kind." "It was, quite simply, a round of golf," he said. "Golf was our common ground, nothing else." The 81st edition of the Masters Tournament, which is the first of men's golf's four major championships, starts Thursday. McIlroy, currently ranked No. 2 in the world, has never won the event, and it's the one major title missing from his resume.  
1491426040	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/05/middleeast/syria-airstrike-idlib-how-it-unfolded/index.html	From airstrike to aftermath: How Syria attack unfolded - CNN.com	Editor's Note: This article contains extremely graphic images of dead children. All times are local. Nightmarish accounts continue to filter out of Khan Sheikhoun, the northern Syrian town still reeling from what is feared to be the deadliest chemical attack in the country in years. Investigations are underway to determine who was responsible for the Tuesday morning attack that left at least 70 dead, according to activists. This is how it unfolded, based on eyewitness accounts provided to CNN. 6:30 a.m.: Airstrike hits town center, chemical agent suspected An airstrike hit the town center of Khan Sheikhoun, emitting a "poisonous gas," Anas al-Diab, an activist with the Aleppo Media Center (AMC) says. Casualties are reported to have died from asphyxiation caused by exposure to an unknown gas or chemical agent. The injured are initially treated at a makeshift clinic near the scene and Al-Rahma hospital, among others. Doctors Without Borders medics who visit the area's hospitals later say some victims appear to have symptoms consistent with exposure to a neurotoxic agent "such as Sarin gas or similar compounds." Three more strikes reported Five minutes later, three additional strikes reportedly hit the town center, al-Diab says. This time there are no descriptions of gas. At this point it is unclear if the planes involved are Syrian, but the rebel-held city is regularly targeted from the air by the Syrian military and its ally, Russia. Russia later denies having warplanes in the vicinity. Casualties arrive at hospital Warning: This section contains extremely graphic images of dead children. Fares al-Jundi, a doctor who lives in a nearby village, hurries to the Maarat al-Numan hospital immediately after the airstrikes. "I've never seen anything like it, beyond description," he tells CNN as he describes the horrifying scenes. Al-Jundi estimates up to 500 people have been brought in; the wounded cover entire floors, from the patients' rooms and operating theaters and any remaining space in the corridors. "I believe this horrible memory will stay with me for the rest of my life," he continues. Chaos on the ground Hadi al Abdullah, an activist journalist, arrives on scene two hours after the initial attack. Abdullah, who is suffering from blurred vision, a splitting headache and lethargy -- common side-effects of exposure to nerve gas -- says the scene is chaotic. He tells CNN that that people were not initially aware of the presence of a toxic agent. Some who rushed to help are overwhelmed by the gas, including several members of the Syrian Civil Defense (SCD), or White Helmets, who have to be rescued by others from the group. Abdullah says around 30 wounded people have gone to Turkey for treatment. Hospitals targeted in follow-up airstrikes, activists say The makeshift clinic and Al-Rahma hospital, where the injured are being triaged, are targeted in new airstrikes four hours after the chemical attack, Idlib's health directorate and the SCD say in a joint press release. Videos emerge on social media Videos, which appear to be from the scene, are posted quickly to social media platforms. Mohammed Hardan, who works for AMC, says he was at al-Rahma hospital when it was targeted by aerial bombardment, posting footage of the incident hours later. White Helmets: Residents targeted by poison gas Warning: This section contains graphic images of dead children. The White Helmets say at least 50 people, including women and children, have been killed by "poisonous gases." 70 dead, activists say AMC activists say the Syrian regime is behind the attack and says at least 70 people are dead. It adds that 45 bodies have been identified so far. Syrian army denies chemical attack On Tuesday evening, Syrian President Bashar al-Assad's military "categorically denies" using chemical weapons and blames "terrorist" groups for the carnage. But many in the international community blame the Assad regime for the outrage. WEDNESDAY: Turkey says it has evidence of chemical attack Recep Akdag, Turkey's Health Minister, tells Turkish media: ''We have findings that suggest there was a chemical attack. We are sending these findings to World Health Organization as well after documenting them. Humanity should not remain insensitive to this issue." Turkey's Health Ministry later says 29 victims are being treated at six hospitals, and that three victims have died after their arrival. Survivors recall the horror Survivors who made it to the Reyhanli Hospital on the Turkey-Syria border say they saw a plane drop chemical bombs. Mazin Yusif, 13, tells CNN that he found his grandfather slumped over in front of his house shortly after the strike and ran for help. "I got dizzy and then fainted in front of my grandfathers garage. I next found myself here in this hospital, naked in a bed," he adds. 31-year-old Ahmed Abdel Rahim was also caught up in the strike. "I was in my house," he tells CNN. "I had difficulty breathing, but I feel better now. But I did throw up after getting to the hospital. I don't know if my family is dead or alive. I don't know anything." Syrians began burying their dead on Wednesday. A father CNN spoke to said he lost 25 members of his family, including his wife and 9-month-old twins. "My brothers, their children, and their cousins. Around 25 members of my family, all martyred," Abdul Hamid Youssef said, sobbing. CNN's Ben Wedeman, Kareem Khadder, Schams Elwazer, Elizabeth Roberts, Eyad Kourdi, Tamara Qiblawi, Angela Dewan, Eliza Mackintosh and Euan McKirdy contributed to this report. 
1491427377	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/05/cnn10/ten-content-thurs/index.html	CNN 10 - April 6, 2017 - CNN.com	April 6, 2017 As U.S. President Donald Trump prepares to meet with Chinese President Xi Jinping, how do the two leaders differ on their approaches to North Korea? And what other subjects will they discuss? Those topics are followed by reports on a mission to Saturn, the health benefits of reading, and a space station zipline. TRANSCRIPT Click here to access the printable version of today's CNN 10 transcript. CNN 10 serves a growing audience interested in compact on-demand news broadcasts ideal for explanation seekers on the go or in the classroom. The show's priority is to identify stories of international significance and then clearly describe why they're making news, who is affected, and how the events fit into a complex, international society. Thank you for using CNN 10  
1491427342	http://money.cnn.com/2017/04/04/media/list-oreilly-factor-advertisers-responses/index.html	Read what Bill O'Reilly's sponsors are saying about 'disturbing allegations' of harassment - Apr. 4, 2017	O'Reilly accuser: I'm not after money Fox News' "The O'Reilly Factor" is facing a rapidly growing exodus of advertisers in the wake of a New York Times report that five different women had reached settlements over allegations of sexual harassment or verbal abuse against the show's host, Bill O'Reilly. CNNMoney has reached out to dozens of the companies that have run ads on the program. Below is a list of the responses we've received so far, as well as some responses that companies have put on their Twitter accounts after users of that site asked them about their ads. Companies pulling their ads from "The O'Reilly Factor" Mercedes-Benz: "Yes, we had advertising running on The O'Reilly Factor (we run on most major cable news shows) and it has been reassigned in the midst of this controversy. The allegations are disturbing and, given the importance of women in every aspect of our business, we don't feel this is a good environment in which to advertise our products right now." Hyundai: "Hyundai currently has no advertising on The O'Reilly Factor. We had upcoming advertising spots on the show but are reallocating them due to the recent and disturbing allegations. As a company we seek to partner with companies and programming that share our values of inclusion and diversity. We will continue to monitor and evaluate the situation as we plan future advertising decisions." BMW of North America: "In light of the recent New York Times investigation, BMW of North America has suspended its advertising with 'The O'Reilly Factor.'" Mitsubishi: "Mitsubishi Motors takes these allegations very seriously and we have decided that we will pull our advertising at the present time. We will continue to monitor this situation as we assess our long-term strategy." Lexus: "We take our duties as a responsible advertiser seriously and have been closely monitoring the situation involving 'The O'Reilly Factor.' In response, we have asked our media-buying partners to move all Lexus ad inventory out of the program." Ainsworth Pet Nutrition: "We removed our advertising from the program because of these recent and disturbing allegations." Constant Contact: "Based on the recent allegations and our strong commitment to inclusion, respect and tolerance in the workplace, we have decided to pull Constant Contact's ads from The O'Reilly Factor." Credit Karma: "In light of the recent concerning allegations, we will not be advertising on this show and have asked for our ads to be removed." Bayer: "Bayer supports a safe, respectful and non-abusive environment for women and we have reached out to Fox to voice our concerns regarding this matter. Based on the serious nature of these allegations, we have made the decision to suspend all advertising on the program in question. This suspension has been requested immediately and will be handled as expeditiously as possible. We have been informed, however, that programming changes may not become effective immediately. It is important to note that Bayer purchases packages of advertising time across all major networks without selecting placement on any specific program. We regularly evaluate our advertising purchases to make sound judgments to continue or discontinue based upon our beliefs, values and ethical considerations." TrueCar: "Pending further assessment of recent developments, we have instructed our media buyer to direct our advertising to other programming." GlaxoSmithKline: "We are continually reviewing our advertising to ensure it is conducted in a responsible manner aligned with our values. We have temporarily put a hold on spots running on The O'Reilly Factor while we assess this situation." Sanofi: "At Sanofi Consumer Healthcare, decisions about advertising on any given website, network, magazine, or programs are never undertaken as an endorsement or non-endorsement of the host, editorial or entertainment content. Rather, our purpose in advertising our product is to provide important information to consumers so that they may make an informed decision about which product will best provide relief for their symptoms. The controversy around The O'Reilly Factor program and allegations made against Bill O'Reilly are matters that we take seriously and will continue to monitor. We do not endorse the behavior or opinions of program hosts or the content. We have reallocated our current advertising originally scheduled during this program. We will continue to monitor and evaluate the situation as we plan future advertising decisions." UNTUCKit: "As a company in which more than 2/3rd of our employees are women, we take sexual harassment claims very seriously. Moreover, it is important our corporate partners reflect the same principles of inclusivity and equality upon which we have built our brand. In light of the disturbing allegations, we instructed our media buyer this morning to reallocate our ad dollars to other shows effective immediately. We will continue to closely monitor the situation but believe this is the right decision at this time." Allstate: "Inclusivity and support for women are important Allstate values. We are concerned about the issues surrounding the program and we have suspended our advertising." Esurance: "In light of the recent controversies surrounding Bill O'Reilly and his treatment of women, Esurance is suspending its advertising during "The O'Reilly Factor." At Esurance, inclusion and support for women extends across all aspects of our business — from our associates to our customers to our partners. And we want to partner with organizations and programming that share those same values." T. Rowe Price: "We regularly evaluate our media buys to ensure alignment with our corporate values, and in light of the recent allegations we have decided to pull our upcoming ads from The O'Reilly Factor." Wayfair: "We do not have any future ad buys planned for the show at this time. We condemn all forms of harassment and are closely assessing the situation. We have advertised on the show in the past and in light of the reports have moved our spots to other programming while we assess the situation." Orkin: "Orkin buys its advertising in broad dayparts on networks that reach our target audience. We do not buy specific shows, including the O'Reilly Factor. The O'Reilly Factor is in the daypart that we buy on Fox, and we have added that show to our "Do Not Buy" list in the wake of the current allegations." Society for Human Resource Management: "SHRM has determined to cease its current advertising on the Fox News Network." The Wonderful Company: "At The Wonderful Company, we are committed to a respectful and inclusive workplace enviornment and insist upon the same from our business partners. We do not currently have or plan for ad inventory on this show." Coldwell Banker: "We were disappointed that our ad ran on O'Reilly as it wasn't part of our intentional media programming. We pulled future ads from the show." H&R Block: "We share your concern about recent allegations, and no longer advertise during The O'Reilly Factor as a result." Weather Tech: "We are already working on adjusting our advertising schedule and we appreciate your feedback." Advil: "We are no longer advertising on the Bill O'Reilly show." BambooHR: "BambooHR condemns workplace harassment, and in light of recent allegations, has canceled ads on The O'Reilly Factor." Jenny Craig: "As an organization, Jenny Craig condemns any and all forms of sexual harassment. As a matter of corporate policy, we do not publicly comment on our advertising strategy. We are constantly evaluating our media buys to maximize the efficiency of our corporate investment and effectively reach our target audience. However, we can confirm that we have suspended all ads on The O'Reilly Factor." Ancestry: "Equality and respect are core values for Ancestry, especially in the workplace. We will not support those whose actions conflict with those values. To be clear, we have pulled our ads from Bill O'Reilly." Subaru: "After review, we will no longer advertise during the Bill O'Reilly show in the future." Old Dominion Freight Line: "In light of the recent allegations surrounding the Bill O'Reilly show, OD has decided to discontinue our commercials from the show." Amica Insurance: "Our ads on The O'Reilly Factor are being pulled. It may take a few days for this to occur." LegalZoom: "This was not part of our intentional media programming and we have pulled all ads from this show." Invisalign: "Align Technology is redirecting its media buy for Invisalign spots and will not advertise on/around The O'Reilly Factor." Pacific Life: "As of today, Pacific Life is no longer an advertiser on the O'Reilly Factor." Visionworks: "Visionworks' media buy was with Fox News, not with any show specifically. Once we learned about the allegations, we pulled our ads from the program. Our media strategy is built around programming that aligns with our company's, and our customer's, core values. We continually review our advertising strategy and update on a quarterly basis, however when situations arise, we are able to work with our media partners to act swiftly to ensure our core values are embodied. After recent allegations on "The O'Reilly Factor," Visionworks has pulled all ads." Stanley Steemer: "We are in the process of removing our commercials from 'The O'Reilly Factor."' Carfax: "For more than 30 years, CARFAX has been working hard as a consumer advocate to give Americans the facts about used cars. The ongoing controversy over The O'Reilly Factor is a distraction from our mission to help millions of consumers. Therefore, we have instructed FOX News to remove our advertising from the program." Eli Lily and Company: "Eli Lilly and Company has suspended its advertising on The O'Reilly Factor for now." Allstar Products Group: "It was a corporate decision for Allstar Products Group to pull the media." Propane Council: "The Proudly Propane campaign is no longer advertising on The O'Reilly Factor, effective immediately." Reddi Whip: "We've received some questions about our advertising presence on the O'Reilly Factor. We are removing the show from our advertising plans." GoodRx: "After review, GoodRx will no longer advertise on The O'Reilly Factor. We are in the process of removing our ads." Southern New Hampshire University: "In light of recent allegations, SNHU has pulled all advertising from The O'Reilly Factor. As a University, we value diversity, inclusion, and respect for all, and we take every measure to ensure our advertising is consistent with our core values." Touchnote: "We requested that our commercials won't run on the show. Sadly pre-booked spots may still air." Companies currently evaluating whether or not to keep advertising on "The O'Reilly Factor" Trivago: "We are constantly reviewing our media buys to ensure we do not support any behavior that contradicts trivago's corporate values. We are currently reviewing the information available, but do not discuss our advertising strategy publicly." Enterprise Holdings: "We are looking into this, but we haven't made any decisions." TD Ameritrade: "We don't have a direct media buy with the program, and we have only run advertising on the show once in the last quarter. We have no plans to run anything else, at a minimum, until much later in the spring. Harassment in any form is unacceptable, and because one of our core values is People Matter, this is a situation that we are monitoring closely. If we need to make additional changes to our media buying strategy down the road, we have the flexibility to do so." Expedia: "We regularly evaluate all of our media buying, as we are doing now with regard to this program." Companies that will continue to advertise on "The O'Reilly Factor" Angie's List: "The advertising strategy we have long used at Angie's List is meant to reach as many people as possible with news that our service exists and is available to them. We place ads across a wide spectrum of venues intending to reach as many viewers/listeners/ readers as possible without taking a position on the viewpoints of the venues themselves. Just as we trust members to make their own hiring decisions, we trust them to make their own media consumption decisions." Companies that have ceased advertising on "The O'Reilly Factor" for other reasons CFP Board: "CFP Board does not have a partnership or a sponsorship with Fox News. Our television advertising is purchased through an advertising network where the advertisements are placed on multiple cable television channels and shows. As our spring flight is winding down, we will no longer have any placements on Fox News." Companies that aren't saying Quincy Bioscience: "We don't publicly comment on our advertising. As a company we condemn all forms of sexual harassment." CNNMoney (New York) First published April 4, 2017: 1:29 PM ET
1491427221	http://money.cnn.com/2017/04/05/news/economy/obamacare-insurers/index.html	More insurers abandon Obamacare. Who might be next? - Apr. 5, 2017	Ryan: Health care talks in conceptual stages First, Humana (HUM) pulled out of Obamacare for 2018. Then, Wellmark announced it was leaving. Which health insurer could be next? The failure of the GOP health care plan in Congress and the ongoing uncertainty surrounding the Trump administration's next moves have left insurers skittish about participating in the Obamacare exchanges next year. And this could leave hundreds of thousands of Americans without an option for subsidized coverage. Certainly, Obamacare was troubled before President Trump took office. Several major insurers scaled back their involvement on the exchanges, while others hiked premiums to cover their sicker-than-expected policyholders. But many experts, including the Congressional Budget Office, felt Obamacare was stable overall. Powered by SmartAsset.com SMARTASSET.COM The lack of clarity coming out of Washington D.C. is prompting some insurers to pull the plug. Wellmark Blue Cross and Blue Shield announced Monday that it was pulling out of the Obamacare market in Iowa for 2018. The move, which affects 21,400 residents, comes a year after Wellmark decided to join the exchange in Iowa, citing its enrollees' interest in accessing federal subsidies that are only available on the Obamacare exchanges. (It has sold plans that meet Obamacare's requirements outside of the exchange for several years.) "Wellmark made it clear ... it's a business decision based on concern over the lack of decision making in Washington D.C. and the uncertainty in the market," said Iowa Insurance Commissioner Doug Ommen. Related: The first place Obamacare could die The company said it has had double digit premium increases and suffered $90 million in losses in its Obamacare-compliant plans over the past three years. "While there are many potential solutions, the timing and relative impact of those solutions is currently unclear," said Wellmark CEO John Forsyth. "This makes it difficult to establish plans for 2018." The U.S. Health and Human Services Department is taking some steps to address insurers' concerns, including a proposal to tighten the rules for signing up for coverage outside the traditional enrollment period and to require consumers to pay any premiums owed before they enroll again. However, the agency's view is that carriers are fleeing the market because the law is "fundamentally flawed," said spokeswoman Alleigh Marré. Wellmark's decision won't leave any Iowans without a choice of carriers since the state has at least two insurers in every market. But the ramifications could be far more hard hitting for those who get coverage on the Obamacare exchanges if one of the nation's larger insurers, opts to withdraw. All eyes are on Anthem (ANTX), which has said it's reviewing its participation next year. If it pulls out, more than 256,000 residents in Georgia, Kentucky, Missouri, Ohio and Virginia would be left with no options -- unless another carrier steps in, according to data crunched by Katherine Hempstead, a senior adviser at the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation, which funds health care research and grants. "An Anthem exit would affect the most people in the most counties," said Hempstead. "It's the most consequential exit that could occur." Speculation rose recently that the insurer would significantly downsize its presence after Jefferies investment analysts said they expected Anthem to leave "a high percentage" of its markets next year. The company, however, wouldn't confirm this projection, saying only it continues "to actively pursue policy changes that will help with market stabilization and achieve the common goal of making quality health care more affordable and accessible for all." Related: Before Obamacare, some liked their health care plans better What's most troubling for some health policy experts is that Anthem is one of the country's BlueCross BlueShield companies, which have long serviced the individual market. In its statement, Anthem notes it has been in the market for more than 70 years. Last year, when Aetna's exit left an Arizona county without any insurers, state and federal regulators prevailed upon that state's BlueCross BlueShield to step in. "The insurer states turn to is the Blues plan," said Cynthia Cox, associate director at Kaiser Family Foundation. Other large insurers, including Aetna (AET) and Molina Healthcare (MOH), are weighing their future on the individual exchanges too. While their departure would leave only one Wisconsin county without other options, it would leave many Americans with only a single choice of insurer next year. CNNMoney (New York) First published April 5, 2017: 10:37 AM ET
1491427208	http://www.cnn.com/2015/07/22/health/meditate-at-work/index.html	The best place to meditate? At work. - CNN.com	This essay is part of a column called The Wisdom Project by David Allan, editorial director of CNN Health and Wellness. He wrote this story in 2014 for the BBC. The series is on applying to one's life the wisdom and philosophy found everywhere, from ancient texts to pop culture. Don't miss another Wisdom Project column; subscribe here. Have you read the latest study about meditation? Probably not, because even as you read this sentence another has likely come out. There is a steady stream of new research and news stories about the benefits of meditation and other mindful breathing practices. As they report, meditation boosts energy, helps with focus, reduces stress and anxiety, increases resilience and possibly, subtly, changes your life and your brain for the better. Of course, not everyone believes in the power of meditation, but once converted, the big hurdle is making meditation fit into your schedule. Just the thought of cramming another thing into your day is stress-inducing. Here's a radical proposal: start your new meditation habit at work. Yup, that work. The office. Busy, stressful, un-meditation-friendly work. It turns out, the office is actually an ideal place to meditate specifically because of those reasons. To quote one of my favourite films, "The Razor's Edge," in which Bill Murray's character searches for the meaning of life: "It's easy to be a holy man on top of a mountain." It's harder, but more rewarding, to be one in the office. Related: Overwhelmed? Overworked? The cure for work overload Not only is work likely one of the major causes of your stress, but it is also a victim of it. A stressed out, unhappy employee is not a productive one. You can counterbalance the negative and even make your office a more peaceful, creative and industrious place with the effect and influence of your meditation practice alone. Plus, if you're like me, it's hard to fit in meditation or anything else in the busy hum of home, especially with a spouse and children and fewer waking hours to spend with them or on other interests. The solution for me was to practice at work: the place I'm already going five days a week and where meditation is needed most. It doesn't need to be a big time commitment — 10 to 15 minutes each day is plenty — and even a couple of minutes can be useful. The key is to commit to doing something, otherwise it's not effective. When I lived in San Francisco my apartment was a few blocks from the city's famous Zen Center and I would wake most mornings for the pre-dawn sittings. It was formal, strictly following the Buddhist tradition, right down to which foot you used to enter the room. I loved it and miss it, but never picked it back up because it always seemed too hard to replicate on my own. So that was my challenge — to get back into practice without it being a burden or competing with other priorities. Find a space The first person I told of my intention to start meditating at work was the office manager. "This may be an unusual request," I emailed him, "but I could use your help. I'm looking to find a room in our office without glass, to book for 15 minutes a day, every day. The purpose is to meditate." Related: Overworked? It might be your own fault Professional but perhaps a bit puzzled, he walked me through a few options in our open-plan office and its meeting rooms with see-through glass walls. We settled on a seldom-used "green room" for talent when the office does studio production. It was perfect: small, quiet, two chairs, no phone. If it's booked, my back-ups include a meeting room with glass just on one side (passers-by see only my back) and a nearby anonymising city park. And if I'm really desperate, I always have that last refuge of privacy: the porcelain sanctuary. Schedule some time I book 30 minutes every day though I never use the whole time. Sometimes I'm a little late; I always finish early. Sometimes I need to reschedule for later in the day. But if I can make it, I do. Whatever I'm working on can wait another 10 to 15 minutes without dire consequences. Unless you're an emergency room doctor or caring for young children, the same is probably true at your job. Even if I'm feeling stressed about something I need to get done right away, I always feel better (that is, less stressed) after I breathe. Now meditate! Keep it simple and easy. Earlier this year, I attended a SXSW talk by Chade-Meng Tan, who teaches mindfulness techniques at Google. He recommended giving yourself a goal of "just one good breath" a day. The idea is that even doing a little bit makes a difference. If you love it, you will naturally and happily increase your practice to as many minutes as you can comfortably sustain. Related: How to cope with criticism Whether you have never meditated before, need a refresher or are just getting started there is no shortage of books, articles, apps and free videos and podcasts available. So start there. Those meditators are practically giving it away! I re-booted my practice by trying out the following in the green room: "Search Inside Yourself" by Chade-Meng Tan. In his book on mindfulness and happiness, Meng offers meditation techniques he introduced at Google that range from basic to one (my personal favorite) that asks you to visualize yourself as a force multiplier for goodness, as if you are (my words) some kind of Buddhist superhero. Stop, Breathe & Think. This app has a growing library of meditations. These all start the same, which is repetitive, and the narrator's voice so soothing it threatened to put me to sleep. But guided meditations can be useful for beginners and the app tracks your progress, as if you were going to a transcendental gym. "The Miracle of Mindfulness" by Thich Nhat Hahn. The renowned pacifist Buddhist monk has written many volumes, but this classic has a whole chapter of meditations, some as little as 10 breaths long. The narration contains others, so it's worth reading the entire short book. "One Moment Meditation" by Martin Boroson. This guide starts with the premise that all you need is one minute. Short chapters help you optimize that minute and learn to take it with you wherever you go. And when you get good at that, it reduces that power minute to a power moment. Please share your favorite practices or sources and let's encourage everyone meditating in every office, everywhere.  
1491427163	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/05/middleeast/idlib-syria-attack/index.html	Syria attack survivors describe chemical bombs falling from sky - CNN.com	This story contains graphic imagery. (CNN)Survivors of a deadly attack in Syria described chemical bombs being dropped from planes, directly contradicting the government's version of events. Global condemnation intensified Wednesday, the day after the apparent chemical attack on a rebel-held town in Idlib province that killed at least 70 people, including children, one of the deadliest since the Syrian war began six years ago. The White House and the UK blamed Syrian President Bashar al-Assad's regime for the attack that struck at dawn in Khan Sheikhoun when some were still asleep. At the United Nations, Western powers lambasted Russia for standing by the regime. The World Health Organization said victims bore the signs of exposure to nerve agents, and Amnesty International said evidence pointed to an "air-launched chemical attack." International agencies are investigating the origin of the agents used in the strike. Key developments Chemical weapons expert: Russia's explanation of events is "highly implausible." President Donald Trump said the attack changed his views on Syria and Assad. Medical experts said the attack was likely the result of a nerve agent, such as sarin gas. The UN Security Council held an emergency meeting but didn't vote on a resolution. War of words Trump called the attack on innocent civilians an "affront to humanity." "These heinous actions by the Assad regime cannot be tolerated," Trump said Wednesday. He said the chemical attack has changed his views Syria and Assad. "It crossed a lot of lines for me. When you kill innocent children, innocent babies ... with a chemical gas that is so lethal that people were shocked to hear what gas it was, that crosses many, many lines -- beyond a red line." Russia asserted the deaths resulted from a gas released when a regime airstrike hit a chemical weapons factory. But survivors being treated in a hospital on the Turkish side of the border told a CNN team they saw chemical bombs being dropped from planes. The Russian Defense Ministry said on its Facebook page that a Syrian airstrike hit "workshops, which produced chemical warfare munitions" on the eastern outskirts of Khan Sheikhoun. It said "terrorists" had been transporting the chemical munitions from their largest arsenal to Iraq. But Dan Kaszeta, a chemical weapons specialist, told CNN the Russian version of events was "highly implausible." "Nerve agents are the result of a very expensive, exotic, industrial chemical process -- these are not something you just whip up," said Kaszeta, managing director of Strongpoint Security, a security consulting firm based in London. "It's much more plausible that Assad, who's used nerve agents in the past, is using them again." Hours after the attack, several people were injured when an airstrike hit near a hospital in the same town. Survivors of the earlier attack were being treated there, the Aleppo Media Center activist group reported. The hospital was knocked out of service, said the Syrian Civil Defense rescue group, known as the White Helmets. Victim: 'I don't know if my family is dead or alive' Mazin Yusif, a 13-year-old-boy, broke down in tears Wednesday at the Reyhanli Hospital in southern Turkey near the Syrian border. About 25 survivors of Tuesday's attack are being treated there, and several said they saw a plane drop chemical bombs. "At 6:30 in the morning, the plane struck. I ran up on our roof and saw that the strike was in front of my grandfather's house," Mazin told CNN. He said he ran toward his house and found his grandfather slumped over. He ran outside to call for help. "I got dizzy and then fainted in front of my grandfather's garage. I next found myself here in this hospital, naked in a bed." The boy's grandmother, Aisha al-Tilawi, 55, said she saw blue and yellow after the plane dropped a chemical-laden bomb. "We started choking, felt dizzy, then fainted. Mazin was trying to wake up his grandfather. Three of my family died," she said, lying in bed with an oxygen mask on her face. Another survivor, Ahmed Abdel Rahim, 31, stared vacantly from his hospital bed while explaining he was hit with a poisonous substance carried by three rockets. "I was in my house. I had difficulty breathing, but I feel better now. But I did throw up after getting to the hospital. I don't know if my family is dead or alive. I don't know anything," he said. Worldwide condemnation WHO said some victims showed symptoms consistent with exposure to a category of chemicals that includes nerve agents. That conclusion was supported by Amnesty International, which said victims were "very likely" to have been exposed to a compound such as sarin. The Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons said it was gathering evidence about the attack. Speaking at a high-level meeting in Belgium on the future of Syria, UK Foreign Secretary Boris Johnson blamed the Syrian regime. "All the evidence I have seen suggests that it was the Assad regime who did it, in full knowledge they were using illegal weapons in a barbaric attack on their own people," Johnson said. Assad's military has repeatedly denied using chemical weapons and consistently blames "terrorist" groups when chemical attacks are reported. But many of these are delivered through airstrikes, and no rebel or terrorist group in Syria is believed to have the capacity to carry out aerial bombardments. A UN investigation in August found that chemical weapons had been used in Syria, both by the national air force and ISIS militants. It found two instances where regime forces had used chlorine as a chemical weapon, and one where ISIS had used mustard gas between 2014 and 2015. The Syrian Coalition, an umbrella opposition group, compared this week's suspected chemical attack to one in 2013 in eastern Ghouta "that the international community allowed to pass without accountability or punishment." A UN report found that sarin had been used on civilians in the earlier attack that activists said killed about 1,400 people. UN emergency meeting At an emergency meeting Wednesday of the UN Security Council, Nikki Haley, the US ambassador, held up photographs of children foaming at the mouth as evidence of the attack. "If Russia has the influence in Syria that it claims to have, we need to see them use it," said Haley, who is also the council president. "We need to see them put an end to these horrific acts. How many more children have to die before Russia cares?" Haley hinted that the United States was open to using military action in response. "When the UN consistently fails in its duty to act collectively, there are times in the life of states that we are compelled to take our own action," she said. Haley threatens 'our own action' in Syria if UN doesn't act Russia, Syria's most powerful ally, made clear it would not support a resolution put forward by the United States, the UK and France condemning the use of chemical weapons within Syria and requiring the regime to provide flight logs from the day of the attack. Russia has used its veto power as a permanent member of the Security Council at least seven times on Syrian resolutions. On Wednesday afternoon, Security Council members left closed consultations without taking a vote on the draft resolution. No member spoke as they left the chambers. Syria's deputy ambassador to the United Nations, Mounzer Mounzer, flatly denied accusations his government is responsible, blaming "terrorist groups" for the dozens of deaths. "Syria also reaffirms that the Syrian Arab Army does not have any form or type of chemical weapons," he said. "We have never used them, and we will never use them." CNN's Euan McKirdy, Ben Wedeman, Tamara Qiblawi, Eyad Kourdi, Lindsay Isaac, Onur Cakir, Richard Roth and Milena Veselinovic contributed to this report. 
1491427127	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/05/politics/melania-trump-queen-rania-jordan-public-charter-school/index.html	Melania Trump, Queen Rania visit DC public charter school - CNNPolitics.com	Washington (CNN)First lady Melania Trump and Jordan's Queen Rania traveled Wednesday to an impoverished area of Washington to visit DC's first and only public charter school for girls in pre-K through eighth grade, where they participated in a listening session and visited classrooms. The model and the monarch visited Excel Academy located in southeast Washington, and were greeted by students bearing bouquets of flowers. "That's so beautiful, thank you," the first lady said as she gave student Danielle Chatman a hug. The down-to-earth Queen engaged with the listening session participants frequently, asking a parent on the panel where she was from, and inquiring about the school's mission regarding building life skills. "We believe that in educating a girl, we educate a family, we educate a community," school CEO Deborah Lockhart said, discussing the school's social services, extracurricular and special needs programs. The sunny charter school was filled with colorful, student-designed feminist posters, some reading, "Women are Intellectual Queens," "Sisterhood is not a destination, but a journey," and "I am woman, hear me roar." The duo stopped by an 8th grade art class and a 5th grade science class, where Trump greeted students working on Van Gogh-inspired watercolor paintings of daffodils. The pair spoke with students in lab coats and safety goggles excitedly dissecting owl pellets. Queen Rania has made education and children a top advocacy priority, launching several key initiatives, including the Queen Rania Foundation for Education and Development; the Queen Rania Teacher Academy; the Jordan River Foundation, which focuses on child safety and community empowerment; and Madrasati, which connects "individuals, private companies and organizations, and provide them with support for improving the physical and educational learning environments of Jordan's most neglected public schools." Their husbands, President Donald Trump and King Abdullah II held meetings at the White House. Trump and Queen Rania appeared to already be friendly and comfortable together: As they settled in around a table for the conversation with students, parents and faculty, Queen Rania's chair was noticeably elevated. "You got very tall," Trump said, laughing. "Oh, I think it's my chair," the Queen said, adjusting her seat. "Bring me down to earth." As Queen, she has visited with four first ladies in Washington since King Abdullah came to power in 1999, writing fondly of Michelle Obama as she left office earlier this year. "Exceptional first lady -- looking forward to the next chapter in your life and the inspiration you will bring to girls' education. Watch out world -- you haven't seen the best of this woman yet!" she wrote in an Instagram post. And as Trump continues to staff her East Wing and prepare for a move from Trump Tower to the White House at the conclusion of the school year, her platform as first lady is coming into focus. While she said on the campaign trail that she planned to focus on combating cyberbullying on the campaign trail, recent appearances also indicate her interest in women's empowerment and education. CNN's DJ Judd contributed to this report. 
1491426752	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/05/us/severe-weather/index.html	Storms in Southeast: Tornado, flash-flood warnings issued across Georgia - CNN.com	(CNN)The National Weather Service issued tornado and flash-flood warnings for counties across Georgia on Wednesday afternoon as a system of storms barreled through the Southeastern United States. The storms were expected to leave nearly 60 million people at risk of tornadoes, damaging winds, thunderstorms and flooding, according to a CNN forecast. The severe weather threatened residents of Alabama, Florida, Georgia and South Carolina, and is expected to move into the Ohio and Tennessee valleys, according to the National Weather Service. The agency issued a tornado watch, which means that conditions are favorable for severe weather, for a broad area stretching from Alabama up into Indiana. A tornado emergency was issued for Webster and Sumter Counties in Georgia earlier Wednesday. In Sumter county, a tornado up to a mile and a half wide was spotted, county emergency management director Nigel Poole told CNN. "We are still taking cover and actively watching the storm," Poole said. "There have been reports of damage, but we have not been able to access them yet." Molly Chrisman, a student at the University of South Carolina, posted video of her Uber driver out in flooded streets in Columbia. Strong winds and baseball-size hail were expected in parts of Alabama, where Gov. Robert Bentley declared a state of emergency ahead of the weather event. Jake Reed, a meteorologist for CNN affiliate WHNT-TV in Huntsville, Alabama, issued a stark warning on Facebook, saying it was "far and away the biggest threat Alabama has seen in quite some time." In Georgia, there was a chance for isolated tornadoes and hail, National Weather Service meteorologist Matthew Sena told CNN. Metro Atlanta was hit by a deluge of rain. Flash-flood warnings were issued for several counties surrounding Atlanta and Athens to the east. A flash-flood watch was issued for area across northern Georgia. At the Masters golf tournament in Augusta, Georgia, the Par 3 Contest was canceled due to the inclement weather. In addition, the Federal Aviation Administration issued a ground stop for flights at Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport. The ground stop was lifted in the afternoon, but delays are expected as the storm hits the area. CNN's Haley Brink, Christina Zdanowicz, Dave Hennen and Tony Marco contributed to this report. 
1491427734	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/05/politics/republican-faltering-health-care/index.html	No repeal deal in sight, GOP to take flight - CNNPolitics.com	Washington (CNN)No deal on legislation to repeal and replace Obamacare is expected before lawmakers head home for a two-week break, putting a cap for now on the on-again, off-again talks that have divided the Republican party. A senior administration source and two senior GOP congressional aides acknowledged that there's no agreement. And House lawmakers tell CNN they're not changing their travel plans and will leave Washington on Thursday. RELATED: More than half of Americans approve of Obamacare now, Gallup poll finds The effort to revive the health care bill that faltered late last month manifested itself in a series of closed-door meetings involving Vice President Mike Pence, White House officials and key GOP lawmakers. The overall dynamics, however, never changed. Conservatives are set on their wish list and Republicans centrists have made clear those requests go too far. But the way lawmakers and the Trump White House have found themselves in the same exact box canyon they wallowed in as the initial iteration of "repeal and replace" imploded less than two weeks ago is illustrative of complexity that continues to dominate -- and plague -- this internal debate. Asked for a status check in the wake of the more than two-hour Tuesday evening affair, one GOP official directly involved was blunt: "No closer to a final deal than we were 24 hours ago, and actually, quite possibly further away than we've ever been." What's driving the current impasse? Confusion. Conservatives in the House Freedom Caucus said Monday night they'd been told very specific things were placed on the table by Pence and Office of Management and Budget Director Mick Mulvaney: Giving states the option of applying for waivers to opt out of three central Obamacare requirements -- essential health benefits,community rating and guaranteed issue. What does that mean? Well, these areas have been identified as crucial by conservatives to reaching their ultimate -- and repeatedly (and repeatedly and repeatedly) stated -- goal: lowering premiums. And that's likely true -- the essential health benefits provision forms the federal floor of what each insurance plan must contain. The guaranteed issue and community rating measures protect those with pre-existing conditions because they require insurers to sell policies to all enrollees, but bar them from charging higher prices to those with health conditions. Community rating also prevents insurers from charging women more. RELATED - More insurers abandon Obamacare. Who might be next? The trade off in providing more robust coverage to individuals regardless of their health status is an increase in the cost of plans. In a sense, these changes would directly undercut Republicans' promise to keep Obamacare's protections for those with pre-existing conditions. But conservatives counter that other provisions in the GOP plan, specifically high risk pools funded run by states but seeded with federal money, would essentially back fill the removal of those regulations, should states opt out. But that's a very, very tough sell to the moderates in the conference, who, according to several who spoke privately with CNN, fear the fallout of including those three opt-out measures in any plan. While amenable to the idea of giving states the option of opting out of essential health benefits, how easily states obtain a waiver remains an open -- and exceedingly important -- question. On top of that, several sources involved in the process said moderates were caught off guard by the news that the other two regulations were on the table. What happened inside last night's meeting? Talk. And lots of it. But there was limited, if any, progress on the thorniest issues: those regulations the White House is explicitly putting on the table in an effort to navigate a compromise. Instead, the discussion settled primarily on the structure and purpose of state run high risk pools, and the possibility of sending more money in that direction via atop the currently allotted $115 billion for a state stability fund. House Energy and Commerce Committee staff briefed on the technical side of everything and circulated some of their own language. But the risk pools were always an accepted area of general agreement. Their inability to even substantively dig in on the key outstanding issues, at least in a way where they start chopping away at the areas of disagreement, "tells you all you need to know about this meeting," one participant said. What was the red flag that things weren't moving forward Tuesday night? There was no legislative text put to the table by the White House. While House GOP staff brought, and circulated, technical language to try and bring members along, even those staffers appeared unclear about what was actually put on the table by the White House, according to one participant involved in the process. Freedom Caucus members insist they're open to the proposal put on the table by Pence and Mulvaney. But member after member from the group say the actual legislative language is crucial and no decisions will be made by the group until that has been put on the table. RELATED: Republicans still searching for a plan B on health care The absence of that language last night was identified as a red flag by participants in all sides of the debate -- and central to the roadblocks that still exist. "I want to make sure I'm clear: there were no agreements tonight," Rep. Mark Meadows, the North Carolina Republican who chairs the Freedom Caucus, told reporters. "There was a general agreement that the progress we're making is really progress." What now? More talk. And now, two weeks at home. Lawmaker after lawmaker, seemingly in a coordinated fashion, emerged from the meeting after 10:30 p.m. ET Tuesday noting that "good progress" had been made. The same players are planning to meet again Wednesday in an effort to hash out agreement on the most difficult issues -- those insurance regulations. But early-week optimism that perhaps a path forward was clearing and, quite possibly, they were on their way to a House floor vote this week, has been decimated. Outside conservative groups, who have stuck firmly behind -- and helped drive -- the Freedom Caucus efforts were preparing to launch a broadside against the party's moderates on Wednesday for standing in the way of what they view as a clear compromise. Majority Leader Kevin McCarthy, R-California, made a surprise visit to the Tuesday meeting which otherwise boasted a grand total of zero participants that came from the party's leadership. But as he departed, he made clear that while lawmakers and the administration were still pushing forward on a bill, it would be "difficult to finish one by the end of the week." The House is currently scheduled to start its two-week Spring recess on Thursday afternoon. As one senior GOP aide involved in the first go-round of "repeal and replace" put it: "Welcome to reality." CNN's Lauren Fox, Deirdre Walsh and Ashley Killough contributed to this report. 
1491427716	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/05/opinions/televised-execution-arkansas-sarat-opinion/index.html	Tune in to watch an execution? (opinion) - CNN.com	Austin Sarat is associate dean of the faculty and William Nelson Cromwell Professor of Jurisprudence & Political Science at Amherst College and the author of "Gruesome Spectacles: Botched Executions and America's Death Penalty." The views expressed here are solely his. (CNN)Arkansas's controversial plan to execute eight men in 10 days later this month has hit an unexpected stumbling block. State law requires that at least six people, "respectable citizens," witness executions to ensure that its laws and procedures are followed. But, to date, the state cannot find enough people who are willing to witness them. So serious is this problem that the director of the Arkansas Department of Correction, Wendy Kelley, has tried to solicit volunteers. According to the Arkansas Democrat-Gazette, she made a personal plea in a speech to the Little Rock Rotary Club to take on this unusual civic role. "You seem," she said, "to be a group that does not have a felony background and are over 21 ... So if you are interested in serving in that area, in this serious role, just call my office." This problem is itself a symptom of the troubling secrecy of what is in fact a public event. One solution to the problem is all too telling: television broadcasts of executions. I oppose the death penalty and if televised executions bring it to an end sooner than would otherwise happen, that would be great. But even if executions go on indefinitely, there's a strong argument to be made for televising them. Whether televised or not, executions are always public by their very nature. The death of a condemned person is in no sense just his own death; it is a killing carried out in our name. The seemingly bureaucratic act of a few state officials is our deed as well. Hiding the deed does not change this fact. Arkansas, like other states, regulates who can witness an execution. Only "respectable citizens" can serve as witnesses. In addition, Arkansas law requires that they reside in the state, not have any felony convictions and be unrelated to the death row inmate or the victim in the case. Other states have different regulations and protocols to determine how many witnesses there must be and who they can be. Arizona requires 12 "citizen witnesses" to be present. Others states require "a half dozen witnesses with no connection to the crime victim or perpetrator and who are not members of the media." Tennessee includes the sheriff of the county in which the crime was committed, the condemned person's spiritual adviser, his defense counsel and the state attorney general or designee. The tradition of having witnesses to an execution is almost as old as execution itself. In the past, however, attendance was not regulated. Anyone who wanted to see an execution could just go to the public square where it would be carried out. According to one historian, public executions, at least since the Middle Ages, were meant to accomplish two goals: "first, to shock spectators and, second, to reaffirm divine and temporal authority." Carrying out the death penalty in public would ensure that it was done the right way and that the punishment would serve its intended purposes. In the present day, doing anything in public is nearly synonymous with doing it on television. This may seem extreme, but consider that throughout most of American history, public executions were an integral part of our death penalty practices. They were open to all and also were major public spectacles. It wasn't until the 19th century, however, that states began to pass laws that removed executions from the view of the general public. In 1936, Rainey Bethea became the last person to be publicly executed in the United States. Bethea, who confessed to the rape and murder of a 70-year-old woman, was hanged in Owensboro, Kentucky. The media circus that his hanging generated helped bring the end of all public executions in the United States. Televising executions provides the needed witnesses, but more importantly, also forces us to consider the meaning and significance of the public's own instinct to turn away from the moment when the state takes a human life. Few people are likely to find televised executions an appealing idea, and both supporters and opponents of capital punishment will object on political and ethical grounds. Supporters oppose broadcasting executions because they fear that doing so will arouse sympathy for the condemned person and lead viewers to ignore the suffering caused by the crime. The death penalty's opponents will say that televising executions (especially those that take place by lethal injection) would give a false and misleading picture that suggests the cruelty of the death penalty is confined to the few minutes of the execution itself -- when in reality it also extends to the years of psychological suffering spent on death row. Still others find the prospect of watching executions gruesome, and worry that televising them would create an immoral spectacle, like a legally-sanctioned snuff film. However, the question of whether executions should be televised is more than just a question of manners and taste. It is fundamentally a question of democracy. Arkansas's difficulty securing witnesses for its scheduled executions offers the occasion for its state legislature to consider allowing television coverage of its forthcoming, two-a-day executions. In Arkansas and elsewhere in the United States, officials have been unwilling to bring television cameras into the death chamber. And citizens have not demanded that executions be televised. This reticence should lead us to rethink the death penalty itself and stop carrying out executions at all. In the meantime, so long as the state continues to kill its citizens in our name, we are obliged not to turn away.  
1491427695	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/05/politics/adam-schiff-white-house-documents/index.html	Schiff: Trump promised documents, but WH staff is fighting release - CNNPolitics.com	(CNN)The top Democrat on the House Russia investigation, Rep. Adam Schiff, said Wednesday President Donald Trump personally promised documents at the center of "unmasking" allegations would be made available to all members of the House intelligence committee, but that White House staff is fighting those documents' release. "The President, when I met with him, said that he is happy to have whoever we wanted review the documents. His staff has opposed that, they were opposed to even letting my own staff review the documents, my staff director," Schiff told CNN on Wednesday. "So we're still trying to get those documents for the full committee, we would like the White House's help if they are sincere about wanting to share this information and have the oversight functions performed, they are to be facilitating this." He added, "But as yet we have not been able to make those documents available to the full committee." A White House spokesperson said the administration "has made all relevant documents available to Mr. Schiff and the Gang of Eight," referencing the leaders of both parties in both chambers, as well as the intelligence committee chairmen and ranking members in each chamber. "As the ranking member well knows, for decades the intelligence community has made intelligence reports as sensitive as these documents available only to the Gang of Eight and their cleared staff members," the spokesperson said. The spokesperson also noted House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi's cleared staff member was at the White House complex Tuesday to view the documents. Schiff also said he has signed on to two formal invites -- one inviting FBI Director James Comey and NSA Director Mike Rogers to return to the House intelligence committee and a second rescheduling the public hearing with former acting Attorney General Sally Yates, former CIA Director John Brennan and former Director of National Intelligence James Clapper. But Schiff said that House Intelligence Chairman Devin Nunes has not yet signed the letter to bring Yates, Brennan and Clapper before investigators. A Republican source responded to Schiff's comments by saying the committee "is committed to speaking to Comey, Rogers, Yates, Clapper, and Brennan, and the committee is now working out arrangements for all five of them to appear." "Because Comey and Rogers were unable to answer around 100 questions at their open hearing, there is discussion about whether the questions put to some of these witnesses can be answered in another open hearing or would require a classified setting," the source added. The White House intelligence documents have taken on greater importance in the two weeks since Nunes secretly traveled to the White House grounds to view them. The intelligence has formed the core of Trump's argument that former national security adviser Susan Rice spied on him, and Trump himself upped the ante in a New York Times interview saying he believed Rice committed a crime. Schiff first mentioned his issues obtaining those documents earlier Wednesday. "The White House clearly only wanted one person to see these documents, and that person was our chairman," Schiff said on CNN's "New Day," referring to Nunes' coordination with White House staff to review documents showing top Trump aides were picked up in "incidental" collection by US intelligence. "I want the full committees to be able to see that, and we're meeting resistance," Schiff said. "If these documents are so damning or so indicating of the President, as he suggests, why are they opposing efforts to provide them to the full committee? I think that's a question worthy of the White House answering." Schiff's accusation marks a turn from just one day ago, when he said that the White House promised to show its intelligence to the other members of the House intelligence committee. Some lawmakers even said they might travel to the White House as early as Tuesday afternoon to review the intelligence, but as of Wednesday morning, Schiff and Nunes were the only lawmakers to have seen the intelligence reports. The intelligence reports at the White House are at the center of two weeks of chaos that led top Democrats to call on Nunes to recuse himself from the House Russia investigation and, later, formed the core of Trump's argument that former national security adviser Susan Rice was responsible for surveillance against him. Since Rice's name first surfaced in conservative media outlets Monday, interest has grown in what the intelligence reports actually show. RELATED: House Russia investigators briefed on Nunes findings, White House trip possible Pelosi said Wednesday she plans to review the intelligence and doesn't "expect to" run into any resistance from the White House. "I expect that I will see that," Pelosi said Wednesday. She then accused Trump of making House Republicans look like "fools." "The White House has made fools of their allies in the House of Representatives in the way they've handled this," Pelosi said. "They cook up some intelligence. They bring the chairman of the committee -- a very distinguished position which he has tarnished -- they use him as a tool to tell him what they have cooked up, now you go tell the President what we have cooked up and try to represent to the American people that this is legitimate intelligence." This story has been updated to reflect breaking news. CNN's Dan Merica contributed to this report. 
1491427694	http://www.cnn.com/2016/07/27/travel/cape-verde-slave-archeology/index.html	Lost slave history of Cape Verde is being unearthed - CNN.com	(CNN)Founded by Portuguese colonialists, the island nation of Cape Verde draws its influences from both Africa and Europe. Small, diverse and laid back, the archipelago nonetheless has a dark past. New finds from archaeologists have brought to light fresh evidence of Cape Verde's role at the center of the transatlantic slave trade. A pirate's battleground Cape Verde's oldest city, Cidade Velho (formerly Ribeira Grande) was settled by the Portuguese in 1462. Exploration had found the island -- like the rest of the archipelago -- was completely uninhabited; a blank canvas to build a strategically important gateway between Europe, West Africa and the soon to be 'discovered' Americas.  As a huge wealth creator for the Portuguese, the city naturally came under attack from its rivals, the English and French. Charles Akibode, director of Cape Verde's Institute of Cultural Heritage claims nations often sent pirates to do their dirty work. "We know that pirates were like the army of the enemy in order to destroy the economy of the other," he explains. "To attack Cidade Velha [was to intend] to destroy the economy of Portugal." The city was destroyed on seven occasions, says Akibode, but such was the wealth of the place that it was rebuilt, time and again. Some clear vestiges of the city's slave past still remain: balconies from which owners would negotiate prices for human property, or the city's imposing fort. Others are more subtle, lying underground. Beneath the surface Using 18th century maps, archaeologists are busy unearthing these chapters of Cape Verde's past. So far they've discovering marble from Italy, limestone from neighboring Maio Island and tiles in Islamic styles. "The remnants of the Grao Parara and the Maranhao company are still here -- it handled slave trade and business with the African coast," says Jailson Monterio, an archaeologist from the Instituto do Patrimonio Cultural. "To the east we have the home on an army colonel. There is a Jesuit school to the west. There are many structures to be found." A team from the University of Cambridge in the UK have recently uncovered the first church to be built by Europeans in Sub-Saharan Africa. "It may be hard to understand why the church was built here," says Monterio. "It's built right on the shore. The water flows right through here." Like many other structures in the city, the church was rebuilt multiple times -- in this case mainly because of rainwater damage. Meanwhile, off the coast lie multiple untouched shipwrecks, evidence of a transitional moment in Cape Verde's history, when the slave trade declined and the archipelago was forced to repurpose itself, becoming a port of call for whalers and ships on transatlantic journeys. There's a wealthy of artifacts to explore, but Cape Verde is not a rich nation. Compounding the issue is the problem that many sites on land are privately owned, and permissions are not always straightforward. "Excavation requires a lot of funding," admits Montiero, who hopes money can be found for further discoveries. "We already have some idea of what is here. What we don't know is the scale and magnitude of it." Cape Verde -- tiny Atlantic islands where 'people breathe music' Madeira, island of eternal spring: 19 reasons to visit  
1491427690	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/05/middleeast/syria-airstrike-idlib-how-it-unfolded/index.html	From airstrike to aftermath: How Syria attack unfolded - CNN.com	Editor's Note: This article contains extremely graphic images of dead children. All times are local. Nightmarish accounts continue to filter out of Khan Sheikhoun, the northern Syrian town still reeling from what is feared to be the deadliest chemical attack in the country in years. Investigations are underway to determine who was responsible for the Tuesday morning attack that left at least 70 dead, according to activists. This is how it unfolded, based on eyewitness accounts provided to CNN. 6:30 a.m.: Airstrike hits town center, chemical agent suspected An airstrike hit the town center of Khan Sheikhoun, emitting a "poisonous gas," Anas al-Diab, an activist with the Aleppo Media Center (AMC) says. Casualties are reported to have died from asphyxiation caused by exposure to an unknown gas or chemical agent. The injured are initially treated at a makeshift clinic near the scene and Al-Rahma hospital, among others. Doctors Without Borders medics who visit the area's hospitals later say some victims appear to have symptoms consistent with exposure to a neurotoxic agent "such as Sarin gas or similar compounds." Three more strikes reported Five minutes later, three additional strikes reportedly hit the town center, al-Diab says. This time there are no descriptions of gas. At this point it is unclear if the planes involved are Syrian, but the rebel-held city is regularly targeted from the air by the Syrian military and its ally, Russia. Russia later denies having warplanes in the vicinity. Casualties arrive at hospital Warning: This section contains extremely graphic images of dead children. Fares al-Jundi, a doctor who lives in a nearby village, hurries to the Maarat al-Numan hospital immediately after the airstrikes. "I've never seen anything like it, beyond description," he tells CNN as he describes the horrifying scenes. Al-Jundi estimates up to 500 people have been brought in; the wounded cover entire floors, from the patients' rooms and operating theaters and any remaining space in the corridors. "I believe this horrible memory will stay with me for the rest of my life," he continues. Chaos on the ground Hadi al Abdullah, an activist journalist, arrives on scene two hours after the initial attack. Abdullah, who is suffering from blurred vision, a splitting headache and lethargy -- common side-effects of exposure to nerve gas -- says the scene is chaotic. He tells CNN that that people were not initially aware of the presence of a toxic agent. Some who rushed to help are overwhelmed by the gas, including several members of the Syrian Civil Defense (SCD), or White Helmets, who have to be rescued by others from the group. Abdullah says around 30 wounded people have gone to Turkey for treatment. Hospitals targeted in follow-up airstrikes, activists say The makeshift clinic and Al-Rahma hospital, where the injured are being triaged, are targeted in new airstrikes four hours after the chemical attack, Idlib's health directorate and the SCD say in a joint press release. Videos emerge on social media Videos, which appear to be from the scene, are posted quickly to social media platforms. Mohammed Hardan, who works for AMC, says he was at al-Rahma hospital when it was targeted by aerial bombardment, posting footage of the incident hours later. White Helmets: Residents targeted by poison gas Warning: This section contains graphic images of dead children. The White Helmets say at least 50 people, including women and children, have been killed by "poisonous gases." 70 dead, activists say AMC activists say the Syrian regime is behind the attack and says at least 70 people are dead. It adds that 45 bodies have been identified so far. Syrian army denies chemical attack On Tuesday evening, Syrian President Bashar al-Assad's military "categorically denies" using chemical weapons and blames "terrorist" groups for the carnage. But many in the international community blame the Assad regime for the outrage. WEDNESDAY: Turkey says it has evidence of chemical attack Recep Akdag, Turkey's Health Minister, tells Turkish media: ''We have findings that suggest there was a chemical attack. We are sending these findings to World Health Organization as well after documenting them. Humanity should not remain insensitive to this issue." Turkey's Health Ministry later says 29 victims are being treated at six hospitals, and that three victims have died after their arrival. Survivors recall the horror Survivors who made it to the Reyhanli Hospital on the Turkey-Syria border say they saw a plane drop chemical bombs. Mazin Yusif, 13, tells CNN that he found his grandfather slumped over in front of his house shortly after the strike and ran for help. "I got dizzy and then fainted in front of my grandfathers garage. I next found myself here in this hospital, naked in a bed," he adds. 31-year-old Ahmed Abdel Rahim was also caught up in the strike. "I was in my house," he tells CNN. "I had difficulty breathing, but I feel better now. But I did throw up after getting to the hospital. I don't know if my family is dead or alive. I don't know anything." Syrians bury their dead on Wednesday. A father told CNN he lost 25 members of his family, including his wife and 9-month-old twins. "My brothers, their children, and their cousins. Around 25 members of my family, all martyred," Abdul Hamid Youssef says, sobbing. CNN's Ben Wedeman, Kareem Khadder, Schams Elwazer, Elizabeth Roberts, Eyad Kourdi, Tamara Qiblawi, Angela Dewan, Eliza Mackintosh and Euan McKirdy contributed to this report. 
1491427539	http://money.cnn.com/2017/04/05/media/can-fox-news-stand-by-bill-oreilly/index.html	Dozens of advertisers have left Bill O'Reilly. Can Fox News stand by him? - Apr. 5, 2017	Brown: Time for Fox to clean shop Bill O'Reilly's future at Fox News is the number one topic among Manhattan media executives, entertainment agents and journalists. But the network is keeping mum. Seemingly the only place where it isn't being discussed is on Fox News. Neither O'Reilly nor Fox has said much about last weekend's report in the New York Times about settlements with five different women who accused the host of sexual harassment or verbal abuse. The matter has only been addressed briefly on Fox's air, and O'Reilly hasn't discussed it in the two editions of his show, "The O'Reilly Factor," that have aired since the story broke. Fox's strategy of silence might make sense for now, given that O'Reilly is more than just a profit center for the company: he is an institution there, almost inseparable from the network, and long seemingly invincible. Then again, that's exactly what media observers said last summer when Roger Ailes was sued by former Fox News anchor Gretchen Carlson for sexual harassment. Ailes resigned two weeks later. As Ailes faced an onslaught of sexual harassment allegations, several of the network's on-air personalities strenuously defended him in the press. And when O'Reilly faced a sexual harassment lawsuit in 2004, he delivered a ferocious response on-air the night it was filed. Now, though, even as more than 40 advertisers have dropped his show, O'Reilly and his network aren't fighting back publicly. Related: Trump defends O'Reilly: 'I don't think Bill did anything wrong' Fox News' relatively subdued response has driven speculation throughout New York media about whether the longtime king of cable news could be on the way out -- and whether such a scenario is even plausible. Most would have dismissed the idea offhand at any other time, but the marked contrast between Fox's strategy in the past compared to now is fueling the discussion. It could be a sign that network mogul Ruper Murdoch and his sons are following through on their pledge to remedy the network's culture. On the other hand, the Murdochs might be quietly circling the wagons, demonstrating the same type of loyalty that Ailes inspired in many of his employees and perhaps bowing to financial reality. Fox renewed O'Reilly's contract knowing that the Times story would be coming out. The Washington Post reported that the new deal extends at least through 2020. Contracts have clauses and escape hatches. But if it really goes to 2020, those could be very expensive for the network. Then there's the matter of a replacement. Fox has no obvious person in line to succeed O'Reilly right now. "They are running plays from the Roger Ailes playbook and it is out of date," said one media executive at another company. "The Murdoch sons were supposedly 'disgusted' by Ailes' style and tactics, and couldn't wait to run him out of the company -- but if imitation is the sincerest form of flattery, they seem to be heaping praise on Ailes this week." Related: Why Bill O'Reilly and Fox News might be able to weather advertiser storm Of course, there could be millions of reasons why Fox News is standing by O'Reilly. As in millions of viewers, and hundreds of millions of dollars. "The O'Reilly Factor" has been the no. 1 program on cable news for 16 years running, and it's coming off the best quarter of ratings it's ever had. On Monday, the show demonstrated its ratings prowess once again, drawing 3.65 million viewers -- far more than any of its competitors. It's also a cash cow. "The O'Reilly Factor" generated more than $178 million in advertising revenue in 2015 and over $118 million in the first nine months of 2016, according to Kantar Media. An on-air personality at a rival network said O'Reilly is a "holy grail" for advertisers. "You can't go alt-right if you're a major corporation," the source said. "He's as far as you can go to reach older, conservative Americans." The exact fallout of the advertising exodus isn't clear yet. Paul Rittenberg, Fox News' executive vice president of advertising sales, said in a statement Tuesday that the network was working with advertisers to "address their current concerns about the O'Reilly Factor," and that "the ad buys of those clients have been re-expressed into other FNC programs." That would suggest that the advertising revolt, such as it is, hasn't affected Fox's bottom line -- at least not yet. Mercedes-Benz and Sanofi, two companies to withdraw from the "Factor," both confirmed to CNNMoney that their ads would be re-allocated to other Fox programs. Only one organization, the Society for Human Resource Management, said it had ended its advertising on the entire network. Related: Read what Bill O'Reilly's sponsors are saying about 'disturbing allegations' of harassment Richard Levick, a public relations specialist who has worked in crisis management, said that "it's going to have to get very costly" before Fox shoves O'Reilly out. "This is all about the math," said Levick. "This is not about doing the right thing. If Fox was interested in doing the right thing, it would have done it long ago." "The question that Fox has to ask is, are viewers going to start getting asked by their children: 'Why are you watching this man?'" he added. "And once Fox feels that that moment's come, that will have as much, if not more, resonance than the advertising dollars." Levick said that we're living in the "age of mercantile activism," which could change the equation for the advertisers -- and for Fox. "If the ads are just being reassigned to other Fox shows, it temporarily gives companies the opportunity to do the right thing and look good," said Levick. "But as mercantile activism continues to evolve, consumers are going to begin asking why they're spending money on the network at all." The racial justice organization Color of Change intends to ask that question forcefully. The group called on advertisers to drop O'Reilly this week, and Rashad Robinson, its executive director, said he will be "monitoring what these companies are doing." In 2009, the group spearheaded a similar campaign aimed at advertisers on Glenn Beck's Fox News program. O'Reilly has weathered controversies before, often emerging from them with even more power, but Robinson thinks this time around could be different. "At the end of the day," Robinson said, "money speaks to the Murdochs." CNNMoney (New York) First published April 5, 2017: 3:36 PM ET
1491427418	http://money.cnn.com/2017/04/05/technology/online-privacy-faq/index.html	Your browser history is for sale, here's what you need to know - Apr. 5, 2017	What to know about Internet privacy changes It's official: Your browsing history can be sold to advertisers. President Trump on Monday signed a measure reversing rules that would have required internet providers to get consent before selling your browsing history. The rules had not yet gone into effect, but providers now find themselves with new freedom when it comes to collecting and selling their customers' data. What does that mean for you? What identifying information do they have? Internet providers already collect a lot of information that's necessary to maintain their networks, like your location and what you're looking at online. Many have said they will not use "sensitive" information, like medical records, children's data and banking details without consent. However a simple browsing history can reveal those personal details, such as symptoms you've Googled. There are concerns that it would be possible to identify people based on this detailed information. Related: Congress just killed your Internet privacy protections According to Dane Jasper, cofounder of Sonic, an independent ISP located in California, an internet provider can infer a lot about you based just on your browsing. In addition to basics like age and gender, they might know who your friends are, if you're a recovering alcoholic, or where you went to school. In theory, they could create an in-depth profile of you. How will my information be used? Internet providers will likely sell anonymized information to marketers and advertisers so they can better target ads. Right now, it may seem like individual brands follow you around the web. After you look at boots on Zappos, advertisements from Zappos will likely appear on other unrelated websites. If a provider is collecting information about your behavior on multiple sites, a competitor could use it in real time to show you ads for rival shoe brands. You might also see ads that are more precisely targeted based on the deeper profiles that internet providers are able to build about you, even if they aren't connected to your specific identity. Aggregated information about millions of customers would also provide insights into people's shopping habits. Do they usually check Amazon (AMZN, Tech30) prices after looking at Walmart (WMT)? What else do they do online? "This information could be packaged and sold to marketers who could use that information to develop a better understanding of how things are sold on the web," said Jasper. Can they sell individuals' browsing information? Collected information will mostly likely continue to be sold as anonymized data. But can an ISP sell a person's history with their name attached to it? "It's not clear the law prohibits them from doing it," said Georgia Tech privacy expert Peter Swire. Related: Worried about companies spying on your browsing? Here's what you can do In fact, existing law requires telecommunications companies to protect the information of their customers, said Laura Moy, deputy director of the Center on Privacy and Technology at Georgetown Law. Therefore, she doesn't think the law would allow companies to sell the web browsing history of an individual person with their name attached to it. Moy won't rule out the possibility entirely, though, because language in the existing law is murky. "I could imagine a situation where they could sell browsing history and take out identifying information," she said. The problem is, "If someone really wanted to find you in that data set, they probably could." Questions of legality aside, public backlash would be fierce, Swire noted. From a public relations standpoint, it's not in the best interests of big internet companies to sell individual browsing histories -- which makes it unlikely they will. "It's not likely that we'll see carriers selling data to a dude with a Kickstarter," said Jasper. Will this make it easier for police to get information on people? The rules didn't address warrants to begin with, so there's unlikely to be a major change in how internet providers deal with law enforcement at this time. Aren't Google and Facebook already collecting and selling my data? The carriers' biggest argument for killing the rules was that companies like Facebook (FB, Tech30), Google (GOOGL, Tech30) and Netflix (NFLX, Tech30) can already collect and sell information. Customers might be less concerned about this because it's an understood exchange. Google tracks browsing and scans Gmail to serve ads, and in exchange all of their services are free. "The expectation is that within their silo, they learn about us and serve us ads and that's how they make their money," says Jasper. "But an internet provider, you pay them $50 a month or more. You're a subscriber, and to violate the trust of that subscriber ... to me it's just kind of creepy." How can I protect my data? There are many steps you can take to try and protect your browsing history. We've written a lot of words about that too. CNNMoney (San Francisco) First published April 5, 2017: 5:23 PM ET
1491428337	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/05/health/movie-villains-skin-dermatology-study/index.html	Doctors take a hard look at movie villains, warts and all - CNN.com	(CNN)The first thing people tend to notice about Crystal Hodges is her birthmark: a red and purple patch, called a port-wine stain, that covers the left side of her face. As a child, a bully likened her to a notorious Batman villain. "The name Two-Face is like nails on a chalkboard to my ears," she wrote on The Mighty, which publishes stories by people living with health conditions and disabilities. Hodges is an editor there. Most of the movie characters who come to mind who have distinctive facial features like she does, she recalled, are villains. And a new report, published today in the journal JAMA Dermatology, illustrates what she's been saying all along. Beyond movie villains, she told CNN, "we're not represented in media or in books. We're kind of left out." For the new study, a team of dermatologists examined a handful of the top villains and heroes as ranked by the American Film Institute. Among the villains, they found a cluster of dark circles, abnormal skin colors, scars and warts. The trend goes back to the silent films of the early 1900s, when filmmakers relied on visual cues to show good and evil, according to the authors. The title vampire in the 1921 film "Nosferatu," for example, features a ghastly pale, hairless antagonist. But the trend continues today, the authors said, especially in a global cinema that relies heavily on established motifs. "They'll play scary music, and here you've got an image of a Bond villain or Freddy Krueger or Darth Vader that actually works internationally," said San Francisco dermatologist Dr. Vail Reese, one of the study's authors. Among the film institute's top villains were "Star Wars' " Darth Vader and Regan MacNeil from "The Exorcist," both of whom have facial scars, abnormal skin color and deep, dark circles around their eyes. In her elderly form, the queen from "Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs" has deep wrinkles and a wart on her unusually large, reddish nose, a condition known as rhinophyma. Even the Wicked Witch of the West, in addition to her green complexion, has a wart on her chin. The problem, Reese said, is that these portrayals impact, at least subconsciously, the way the public views real people living with differences that are only skin-deep. "If you have families across the country and their only encounter with someone who's albino was ... seeing this evil scary character, what happens when at the mall they see somebody with albinism?" asked Reese, whose website Skinema.com follows skin conditions in movies such as Leonardo DiCaprio's chapped lips in "The Revenant" and a young Ice Cube's missing moles in "Straight Outta Compton." There are exceptions on both sides of the American Film Institute list, Reese said. These include the clear-faced Norman Bates from "Psycho" and Tom Hanks' purple lesions in "Philadelphia" -- a skin condition known as Kaposi's sarcoma that is associated with AIDS. Even Hugh Jackman, of "Wolverine" fame, has brought attention to his real-life dealings with skin cancer. But these are only exceptions to the rule, Reese said. "If we continue to pair a particular look with (being a villain) ... then pretty soon, it's like Pavlov's dog: Simply seeing a person in that category is enough to prime thoughts of 'villain,' " said Mary Beth Oliver, a professor at Penn State University and co-director of its Media Effects Research Laboratory. She added that the same types of associations can happen with race and ethnicity. Oliver was not involved in the study, though she does conduct her own research on psychology and the media. Her latest work, yet unpublished, focuses on the "House of Cards" antihero Frank Underwood, played by Kevin Spacey. The project explores how people "have come to love Frank Underwood even if they know he's immoral," she said. But given the findings of Reese's analysis, she wondered, "Would we love Frank Underwood if he were physically repulsive?" The struggles of self-image Hodges is used to people's curiosity about her birthmark, but she was not prepared for her own photo to go viral. Nearly three years ago, she received an alarming message from a friend in another state. "Hey, I saw your picture on my newsfeed today," the friend told her. Someone had created a meme out of a photo Hodges had taken shortly after a laser treatment on the birthmark. It was reposted a number of times and seen by millions of people, she said. Because of the meme, people began to recognize her at stores and restaurants. "It never dawned on me how different I must look until that happened," Hodges said. "There's always going to be an ounce of my heart that's kind of broken from that experience." But rather than back away from the unwanted attention, Hodges saw it as an opportunity. She began writing blog posts and giving talks about her experience growing up looking different -- and the responses poured in. "There are a lot of women I've heard from who, their husbands have made them wear makeup to bed," Hodges said. She credits her parents, who "treated (her) like any other kid," for giving her the confidence to wear her birthmark proudly in public. But not all people with birthmarks, scars and other facial traits have thrived like she has. Skin conditions such as acne and alopecia, or hair loss, have been associated with mental health issues like anxiety and depression, according to Dr. Julie Amthor Croley, one of the study's authors and a dermatology resident at the University of Texas Medical Branch. "I think it certainly perpetuates the negative self-image that some of them harbor," said Croley. Playing the part Dennis Hurley doesn't just have a skin condition; he's in the acting business. And he said it affects the callbacks he gets. "I've auditioned for many, many serial killer roles," he said. Hurley is albino, a condition that affects the cells that produce pigment in his skin, hair and eyes. People with albinism typically have very pale skin and white hair. "I feel like people with the skin condition that I have have been classified as ... the butt of a joke or the scary albino," Hurley said, referring to characters like Whitey from the comedy "Me, Myself and Irene" and the twin henchmen from "The Matrix Reloaded." Hurley captured the attention of multiple news networks with his parody of "The Da Vinci Code," whose villain, Silas, is also albino. The film sparked outrage among the albino community, with the National Organization for Albinism and Hypopigmentation taking a public stance against the film. Although Hurley originally submitted for that role, he said he was not tall enough to audition. The part eventually went to Paul Bettany, who is not albino. "That's a role that I could've done without makeup," Hurley said. One role that didn't hinge upon his albinism, though, was his part as the grocery store worker in the music video for Justin Timberlake's "Can't Stop the Feeling." "The fact that I was in the Justin Timberlake video was pretty amazing." he said. "They hired me on my dancing skills alone." Flipping the script Many movie villains physically transform to match what's on the inside, Reese said. Dr. Evil's son, played by Seth Green in the "Austin Powers" movies, loses his hair as his behavior becomes more and more nefarious, matching his father. Linda Blair's demonically possessed character in "The Exorcist" also undergoes a physical transformation. "Before she's possessed, she's this fair-skinned redhead," Reese said. "Not only does the devil take her over, cause her to vomit and twist her head around ... but she gets these incredible scars and lacerations, and her skin color changes." "It's the whole idea that the skin lesions reflect the evil within an individual," he added. Hodges acknowledges that people often conflate inside and out, adding stigma to those who look different. "I think it's sad that we feel that we have to hide ... because society says it's not normal or healthy," she said. But Hodges decided that she would do exactly the opposite: She would become as visible as possible and set a positive example. In an effort to embrace her appearance last year, Hodges invited 50 artists to draw her in their own styles. She was depicted as a Lego character, a mermaid, a Disney princess and a superhero. Many of the drawings prominently feature her birthmark, which is caused by an overgrowth of capillaries in the skin. She hoped the images would encourage people like her. "I wanted them to see, if we were (in movies), here's what we would look like," she said.  
1491428157	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/05/politics/navy-t-45-training-jet-fleet-pause/index.html	Navy puts 'safety pause' on trainer jet fleet - CNNPolitics.com	(CNN)The US Navy has implemented a "safety pause" for its fleet of T-45 training jets, according to a US official, a move that comes just days after more than 100 instructional pilots refused to fly in protest of continuing issues with the aircraft's oxygen system. The two-day temporary grounding of all T-45 Goshawks will give Navy officials time to assess the concerns related to the rising rate of "physiological episodes" affecting pilots. Reported physiological episodes resulting in dizzyness or even blackouts have been caused by oxygen contamination, human factors -- including air sickness and vertigo, failure of the on-board oxygen generation system and the failure of other key systems -- according to testimony last week from Rear Adm. Michael Moran. The number of physiological episodes affecting T-45 pilots per year has quadrupled since 2012, according Moran, a troubling trend that has also been identified in Navy pilots who fly F-18s and EA-18G Growlers. But determining the root cause of the issue is complicated by the fact that more than one factor can be attributed to a single physiological event. Instructional pilots started to boycott training flights last Thursday, after raising concerns that commanders were not doing enough to fix the urgent safety problem despite being informed of the risk. "Last Friday, we had roughly 40% of our flights canceled in the T-45 training commands in Meridian, Pensacola and Kingsville because of operational risk management concerns voiced by the instructor pilots," Navy spokesperson Cdr. Jeanette Groeneveld said in a statement. "We take the concerns of our aircrew seriously and have directed a three day operational pause for the T-45 community to allow time for naval aviation leadership to engage with the pilots, hear their concerns and discuss the risk mitigations as well as the efforts that are ongoing to correct this issue," she added. And a US defense official told CNN earlier that some Navy officers had been covering up the pilots' initial refusal to fly by citing technical and other issues with the aircraft, raising questions about a breakdown in the chain of command. Fox News first reported the pilots' decision not to fly, a move that essentially led to the grounding of hundreds of training flights. After being questioned on the issue, Adm. John Richardson reiterated the Navy's commitment to resolving the issue during testimony before the House Armed Services Committee Wednesday, calling it the "the top safety priority for naval aviation." "It's a complex problem and requires a multidimensional solution, first and foremost is the human dimension and communication," Richardson said, downplaying disagreement between instructional pilots and senior officers as a "breakdown in communication." "We are making sure that we are listening and they all feel like they can be talking to leadership so we understand where their anxiety and concerns are," he added. The Navy has also developed training to make sure pilots recognize the symptoms of hypoxia and understand the appropriate emergency procedures. Hypoxia results from deficiency in the amount of oxygen delivered to cells and can induce potentially fatal complications. But frustration over the lack of a permanent solution led to last week's boycott and Wednesday's two-day pause. "That's a pretty serious thing when pilots say they're not going to fly," Rep. Martha McSally, an Arizona Republican who questioned Richardson about the issue, told CNN following Wednesday's hearing. "To get to the point where you have them saying we're not flying and we don't think our leadership is listening, which is what you're hearing out of these pilots ... that's pretty severe," McSally, a former Air Force pilot, added. CNN's Jeremy Herb contributed to this report. 
1491427875	http://www.cnn.com/2016/07/27/travel/cape-verde-slave-archeology/index.html	Lost slave history of Cape Verde is being unearthed - CNN.com	(CNN)Founded by Portuguese colonialists, the island nation of Cape Verde draws its influences from both Africa and Europe. Small, diverse and laid back, the archipelago nonetheless has a dark past. New finds from archaeologists have brought to light fresh evidence of Cape Verde's role at the center of the transatlantic slave trade. A pirate's battleground Cape Verde's oldest city, Cidade Velho (formerly Ribeira Grande) was settled by the Portuguese in 1462. Exploration had found the island -- like the rest of the archipelago -- was completely uninhabited; a blank canvas to build a strategically important gateway between Europe, West Africa and the soon to be 'discovered' Americas.  As a huge wealth creator for the Portuguese, the city naturally came under attack from its rivals, the English and French. Charles Akibode, director of Cape Verde's Institute of Cultural Heritage claims nations often sent pirates to do their dirty work. "We know that pirates were like the army of the enemy in order to destroy the economy of the other," he explains. "To attack Cidade Velha [was to intend] to destroy the economy of Portugal." The city was destroyed on seven occasions, says Akibode, but such was the wealth of the place that it was rebuilt, time and again. Some clear vestiges of the city's slave past still remain: balconies from which owners would negotiate prices for human property, or the city's imposing fort. Others are more subtle, lying underground. Beneath the surface Using 18th century maps, archaeologists are busy unearthing these chapters of Cape Verde's past. So far they've discovering marble from Italy, limestone from neighboring Maio Island and tiles in Islamic styles. "The remnants of the Grao Parara and the Maranhao company are still here -- it handled slave trade and business with the African coast," says Jailson Monterio, an archaeologist from the Instituto do Patrimonio Cultural. "To the east we have the home on an army colonel. There is a Jesuit school to the west. There are many structures to be found." A team from the University of Cambridge in the UK have recently uncovered the first church to be built by Europeans in Sub-Saharan Africa. "It may be hard to understand why the church was built here," says Monterio. "It's built right on the shore. The water flows right through here." Like many other structures in the city, the church was rebuilt multiple times -- in this case mainly because of rainwater damage. Meanwhile, off the coast lie multiple untouched shipwrecks, evidence of a transitional moment in Cape Verde's history, when the slave trade declined and the archipelago was forced to repurpose itself, becoming a port of call for whalers and ships on transatlantic journeys. There's a wealthy of artifacts to explore, but Cape Verde is not a rich nation. Compounding the issue is the problem that many sites on land are privately owned, and permissions are not always straightforward. "Excavation requires a lot of funding," admits Montiero, who hopes money can be found for further discoveries. "We already have some idea of what is here. What we don't know is the scale and magnitude of it." Cape Verde -- tiny Atlantic islands where 'people breathe music' Madeira, island of eternal spring: 19 reasons to visit  
1491429005	http://www.cnn.com/2016/07/26/travel/best-department-stores/index.html	World's best department stores for shoppers who love classics - CNN.com	(CNN)Imagine a shop where you can buy everything... OK, OK, yes we've heard of the Internet, but we were thinking of an actual real-life shop. Because there's something about a physical store that online shopping just can't replace. And nothing beats a classic department store. In addition to selling stacks of different merchandise and brands, these extravagantly designed stores-within-stores offer something else -- an experience. "Historically the big downtown department stores were almost like city centers," says Jan Whitaker, a department store historian who's penned two books on these emporiums of commerce. "They offered so many services in addition to all the latest products and fashions that they were really more than just stores." Here are 14 city-like department stores that are worth the trip, even for nonshoppers: 1. Le Bon Marche, Paris Often considered the world's first modern department store, Le Bon Marche Rive Gauche has been the chicest place to shop in Paris since its opening in 1852. And being top of the chic list in Paris takes some doing. From the get-go, Le Bon Marche was an innovator coming up with ideas, like reading rooms for idle husbands, that were imitated around the world. As well as its swish merchandise, Le Bon Marche also boasts an impressive art collection that's exhibited around the store. In early 2016, the store was the first retail space to host Chinese artist Ai Weiwei's "Child's Play" exhibition -- showcasing two dozen whimsical bamboo and paper installations. The store's 3,000-square-meter food market La Grande Epicerie is a slice of French food heaven. Located along the Left Bank of the Seine, the store is less crowded than its counterparts on the other side of the river, making it popular with celebrities and with locals. World's 12 best shopping cities 2. Selfridges, London No department store list is complete without Selfridges. Founded in 1909, Selfridges has been voted as the world's best department store at the last three biennial Global Department Store Summits. The store, on London's Oxford Street central shopping drag, has a shrine-like shoe gallery -- the world's biggest for both men and women. In 2014, it splurged a whopping $432 million on creating the world's biggest accessories department. Its summer pop-up rooftop restaurants are as highly anticipated as its famous Christmas windows. In fact, it has the biggest Yuletide obsession in town -- its festive shop opened in August last year. London: Insider Travel Guide 3. Bergdorf Goodman, New York When a department store inspires a documentary titled "Scatter My Ashes at Bergdorf's," it's clearly not just any old shop. Bergdorf Goodman on Fifth Avenue is where Carrie Bradshaw from "Sex and the City," like the rest of New York's most fashionable, stocks her wardrobe. There are also departments dedicated to home, books and children -- plus restaurants. Bergdorf owns a separate three-story men's department across the street. Feeling lost? The upmarket store also boasts an army of personal shoppers, including 88-year-old Betty Halbreich, dubbed the most famous personal shopper in the world. Her office Betty Halbreich Solutions sits on the third floor. 3 perfect meals: New York City 4. GUM, Moscow Moscow's national department store GUM on Red Square has a rich and mysterious history that few can rival. It's survived more than a century of tumult after opening in 1890. The 242-meter-long, three-story structure escaped the bulldozer three times. And it became Joseph Stalin's office in the 1920s. Its lavish toilets were shut down for being a bourgeois luxury in 1918. One of them -- branded Historic Toilet -- has now been restored to its pre-revolutionary grandeur, and is open to anyone willing to spend $1.30 (or $7.50 for shower room with bathrobe, towels and slippers for ladies). Its Communist era hasn't been forgotten -- there are two Soviet-themed cafes, Festivalnoe and Stolovaya No 57. An ice rink opens each winter. Moscow: Insider Travel Guide 5. Illums Bolighus, Copenhagen The 75-year-old Illums Bolighus in Copenhagen is a four-story heaven for design fanatics. With six other stores around Denmark, Norway and Sweden, Illums Bolighus aims to showcase the best of Scandinavian minimalist design. It also carries international brands that match its sleek style. The store stocks everything home-related, from kitchen equipment to furniture to bed and bath products from Nordic and international brands. Products from famed Danish designers Arne Jacobsen, Finn Juhl, Borge Mogensen and Hans J. Wegner have been featured in the store since the 1950s. Obsessed with Danish lamps? Well who isn't? The third floor is where the magic's at. UNESCO's newest World Heritage Sites 6. Isetan, Tokyo Generating the highest sales of any department store in Japan, Isetan's flagship store in Shinjuku is a massive nine-floor shopping maze. Plus there's a roof garden. Standing behind it is Isetan Men's -- another mind-boggling 10-floor department store dedicated, unsurprisingly, to men. The two buildings are connected by a bridge on the third and sixth floor. Isetan Men's houses a golf school on its roof. Like most department stores in Japan, Isetan has an impressive food market in the basement, especially for exquisite-looking desserts. Its promotional hall and a kimono department are on the top floor. Tokyo: Insider Travel Guide 7. Galeries Lafayette, Paris Golden art nouveau interior. Balconies inspired by the Paris Opera House. A magnificent glass dome ceiling. Galeries Lafayette on Boulevard Haussmann in Paris is the epitome of the golden age of department stores. Not just a retail space for upscale merchandise, the glamorous store is such a dazzling spectacle it's a top tourist attraction in its own right. A free 45-minute tour of the Haussmann store is available upon request for parties between 10 to 20 people. Its rooftop terrace offers great views of the French capital. France's most beautiful destinations 8. Harrods, London It's hard to decide where to start looking inside Harrods. Once a humble drapery store, Harrods is now the biggest and the most extravagant -- in terms of installations -- department store in Europe, with a retail space of 90,000 square meters. There's the $39 million "Egyptian" escalator in the middle of the store. Recent renovations have also added a new eye-popping "amber and gold" chandelier by American artist Dale Chihuly. Harrods goes by the motto "omnia omnibus ubique" (Latin for "all things for all people everywhere"). Needless to say, almost everything can be found in this seven-story building. Last year it even started selling property. Until 2014, it had an animal department -- where former U.S. President Ronald Reagan once bought a baby elephant and playwright Noel Coward purchased an alligator. Harrods also once deployed a cobra to guard a pair of sandals (studded with ruby and diamond) that was valued at about $90,000 (£62,000). England's most beautiful destinations 9. Kaufhaus des Westens, Berlin Kaufhaus des Westens (commonly known as KaDeWe) is the largest department store in mainland Europe, spanning 60,000 square meters of retail space. The historic establishment -- first opened in 1907 -- was severely damaged when an American plane crashed into the building during World War II. That didn't stop business for long. It was restored in 1950 and has stood as a significant landmark of post-war Berlin ever since. KaDeWe's food hall is one of the biggest in the world, selling about 35,000 different products and hosting more than 30 gourmet bars helmed by 150 chefs. The 109-year-old store recently commissioned a Rotterdam-based architecture firm to redesign its interior space. The current plan looks refreshing with cool escalators and more glass on top. 11 things Germany does better than anywhere else 10. Nordiska Kompaniet, Stockholm Standing in the heart of Stockholm, Nordiska Kompaniet (NK) is Sweden's oldest luxury department store. "[NK was] founded by Josef Sachs in 1902 with a vision for it to become a cultural and commercial theater," a spokesperson tells CNN. "The store has become both a meeting place and cultural institution that continues to be the stage for many exclusive launches and appearances." NK was the first place in Sweden to sell Barbie dolls and jeans. It also had the first escalator in the country. Its beautiful atrium with marble floor and brass banisters has remained unchanged since 1915. "The marble in the floor is Swedish marble from Kolmarden," says the spokesperson. One of NK's best secrets are its mints. They're produced using a 100-year-old recipe each morning by the in-store bakery -- which many people don't know exists. 20 of Europe's most beautiful hotels 11. 10 Corso Como, Milan Not anyone's idea of a traditional idea of a department store, 10 Corso Como was among the originators of the widely imitated concept store. Having begun life as an art gallery and book store in a converted garage in 1991, 10 Corso Como soon grew into a celebrated dining and shopping destination. Founder Carla Sozzani hopes to promote the idea of slow shopping through her carefully curated selection. Its eclectic space showcases hot and bold fashion labels from Vetements to Maison Martin Margiela. Its book shop has an artistic focus, especially photography. The beauty section stocks some of the rarest fragrances in the world. It also has a restaurant, a courtyard garden and a mini hotel. The boutique department store now has outposts in Seoul, Shanghai and Beijing. Secret past: Inside Milan's crumbling Art Deco 'day hotel' 12. Eslite Spectrum Songyan Store, Taipei Mainly known for its book-selling business, Eslite Spectrum doesn't fit the usual department store profile. The 27-year-old alternative store sells various lifestyle products, including specialty foods and handicrafts from Taiwan. "From its very beginning, Eslite has developed a comprehensive business model centered on culture, creativity and cares for humanity," director of Eslite's public affairs division Sheersong Tseng tells CNN. The lifestyle brand now owns more than 40 stores around Taiwan and Hong Kong, as well as one in China. "The space, services and events are all designed according to the traits of the city in which the store is located," says Tseng. "Therefore no two Eslite Spectrum stores are alike." Our favorite is Eslite Spectrum in Songyan, a former tobacco factory turned creative park. The new building, designed by Japanese architect Toyo Ito, houses two interesting sub-sections. Axes features edgy street apparels from 36 Taiwanese designers. Expo is a platform for creative lifestyle products by hundreds of brands. "Visitors can also participate in handicraft classes such as pottery, glass, wood, metalwork, hand-crafted music boxes and paper art," says Tseng. Taipei: Insider Travel Guide 13. Barneys New York Just to prove department stores will prevail in the era of online retail, here's one that's freshly opened in 2016. OK, so the original Barneys originally opened close to this 7th Avenue spot in 1923, but this is a new incarnation of the chic fashion store. The 5,388-square-meter new premises was designed by New York-based Steven Harris Architects firm. The interior is decked out in cool muted colors, with touches of brass. Its five floors are connected by a four-story atrium and an elegant spiral staircase -- a concept inspired by the old store. "I think if you ask anyone who remembers the original store, the thing that everyone recalls is the stair," Steven Harris tells Barneys' blog The Window. "That was the thing that was the most beautiful, but it was also about display and an element of performance -- being watched as you descended the stairs. "It was truly the center of the space and the most dramatic element." Barneys New York, 101 7th Avenue, New York City 12 things to do in New York City 14. Nihonbashi Mitsukoshi Main Store, Tokyo Japan's oldest department store chain had an unusual hire last year -- a kimono-wearing android. Aiko Chihira, the Toshiba-developed robot is in charge of the information desk at Mitsukoshi department store in Nihonbashi, Tokyo. Chihira, pretty and aged 32, can't answer inquiries yet but can offer directions by running through a pre-recorded message in Japanese. Mitsukoshi's main store in Nihonbashi may not be Tokyo's most fashion-forward store -- that honor goes to Laforet Harajuku -- but the century-old store has a renowned gentleman's department. Need a color analyst to pick out a tie that matches your skin? Seeking a new tailored suit? This is the right place. $27,000 melons? Inside Japan's luxury fruit habit Maggie Hiufu Wong is a former CNN staff writer now working as a freelance journalist in London. 
1491428720	http://money.cnn.com/2017/04/05/media/pepsi-kendall-jenner-tone-deaf-ads/index.html	Pepsi and Kendall Jenner join the rogues' gallery of tone-deaf ads - Apr. 5, 2017	The most tone-deaf ads ever? Pepsi's attempt to piggyback on a social movement with the help of Kendall Jenner is only the latest tone-deaf ad to backfire miserably. The commercial, in which Jenner ditches a photo shoot to join a street protest and then gives a Pepsi to a police officer, might have been an attempt to capitalize on a message of youth and universal harmony. That's what Coca-Cola (KO) did with its iconic "Hilltop" ad in 1971, as "Mad Men" fans know. But "I'd Like to Teach the World to Sing" this was not. Pepsi pulled the ad and apologized on Wednesday after it was accused of exploiting the Black Lives Matter movement. Critics noted similarities between the ad and the famous photo of leshia Evans, a protester who peacefully faced off with Louisiana police after the fatal shooting of a black man last year. It's only the latest doozy from Pepsi (PEP). In 2013, Pepsi pulled a Mountain Dew ad that depicted a beaten and distraught white woman facing a police lineup of black suspects and a goat. Related: Pepsi pulls controversial Kendall Jenner ad And Pepsi is far from the only offender. There's a long history of ads so tone-deaf that it's hard to understand how they ever saw the light of day. -- Just Wednesday, Nivea, the German skin care company, pulled a deodorant ad that depicted a woman and the slogan "white is purity." The ad was posted on Nivea's Middle East Facebook (FB, Tech30) page. The company ran into similar trouble in 2011, when it apologized for an ad depicting a black man and the slogan "Re-civilize Yourself." Come on #Nivea. This is so racist that I do not even know where to begin.😠 Speechless. In future, refer to clothes or products, not colors. pic.twitter.com/m0KTSALFKo — Scott Bellows (@ScottProfessor) April 4, 2017 -- In 2006, Sony (SNE) launched an ad campaign in the Netherlands with the slogan "PlayStation Portable White is Coming." The image featured a white model grabbing a black model by the face. Sony reportedly defended the ad, which was intended to "either highlight the whiteness of the new model or contrast the black and white models." A 2006 Sony campaign. -- A Burger King ad that appeared in Singapore in 2009 depicted a woman with her mouth open and, suggestively placed next to it, the company's BK Super Seven Incher burger. The caption said, "It just tastes better." In a YouTube video years later, the woman said she didn't know her image was being used for that ad. Burger King reportedly blamed an ad agency in Singapore. -- Bud Light bottles in 2015 sported the slogan "The perfect beer for removing 'no' from your vocabulary for the night," part of an ad campaign called Up for Whatever. Executives for the brand, which is owned by Anheuser Busch (BUDFF), later said they regretted the ad. Calling the Bud Light PR Team, you're needed for clean up in the stupid/thoughtless decisions aisle... pic.twitter.com/4FfwicUbdx — Oliver Gray (@OliverJGray) April 28, 2015 Related: Chinese detergent ad panned for racism -- Ford (F) and the ad agency WPP apologized in 2013 for a "creative exercise" submitted for an ad competition. The artwork depicted women tied up and gagged in the back of a Ford Figo, a car available in India. Driving the car was Silvio Berlusconi, former prime minister of Italy. Ford's "creative exercise" for an ad contest fell flat for its Figo car in India. -- SpaghettiOs, a product of the Campbell Soup Company, apologized in 2013 for acknowledging Pearl Harbor Day by tweeting a cartoon of a SpaghettiOs mascot waving an American flag. "We meant to pay respect, not to offend," SpaghettiOs said in a tweet. Hey @SpaghettiOs, it takes real balls to use a bloody and horrific tragedy as marketing. #shameful pic.twitter.com/CTM3GIDnmp — jam (@jamileh) December 7, 2013 -- DiGiorno Pizza apologized in 2014 for using the #WhyIStayed hashtag as a marketing tool without realizing that it was a reference to domestic violence. "A million apologies," tweeted DiGiorno. "Did not read what the hashtag was about before posting." -- Last year, a Chinese company called Qiaobi ran a detergent ad that showed an Asian woman shoving a black man into a laundry machine, then pulling out an Asian man, whom she seemed to prefer. Like the Pepsi-Jenner spot, it was vilified not only for being offensive, but for being offensively clueless. CNNMoney (New York) First published April 5, 2017: 12:03 PM ET
1491429785	http://www.cnn.com/2013/09/06/us/ncaa-mens-basketball-tournament-fast-facts/index.html	NCAA Men's Basketball Tournament Fast Facts - CNN.com	(CNN)Here's some background information about the NCAA Men's Basketball Tournament. March 14-April 3, 2017 - The NCAA Division I Men's Basketball Tournament takes place. Villanova, Kansas, North Carolina and Gonzaga are No. 1 seeds. April 3, 2017 - The North Carolina Tar Heels defeat the Gonzaga Bulldogs 71-65 in the national championship game at University of Phoenix Stadium in Glendale, Arizona. Selection Process: 68 teams are invited to compete. - 32 teams receive automatic bids by winning their conference tournaments. - 36 teams receive an at-large bid from the NCAA Selection Committee. The 10-member selection committee, comprised of athletic directors and conference commissioners, is responsible for selecting the 36 at-large teams, seeding (or ranking) all 68 teams and placing them in one of four regions within the bracket. The committee's field of 68 is revealed on the Sunday before the four first-round games, appropriately dubbed "Selection Sunday." The selection process is based on a number of factors including win-loss record, strength of schedule and Rating Percentage Index (RPI) data. Other Facts: The single-elimination tournament is nicknamed "March Madness" or "The Big Dance." The "First Four" are the four opening round games. Two games match number 16 seeds against each other, and the other two games feature the last four at-large teams selected into the tournament. The winners advance to the next round, the round of 64. Each of the four regions consists of 16 teams that are seeded number 1 to number 16. In the first round, teams are paired according to seed. The number 1 seed faces number 16, number 2 faces number 15, number 3 faces number 14, and so forth. The winning teams advance to the second round. The sixteen teams that advance beyond their first and second-round games are referred to as the "Sweet Sixteen." The remaining eight teams are called the "Elite Eight," and the last four teams are the "Final Four." An underdog or lower-seeded team that advances throughout the tournament is often referred to as a "Cinderella" team. UCLA has won the most NCAA Men's Basketball Tournaments - 11. National TV ad spending during the tournament reached $1.24 billion in 2016. An average of 17.8 million total viewers watched the championship game in 2016. In total, the tournament championship game generated 2.5 billion minutes of television and digital media consumption. Timeline: 1939 - The first tournament is held, and eight teams compete. Oregon defeats Ohio State 46-33. 1954 - The tournament final is broadcast live nationwide for the first time. 1991 - CBS begins broadcasting all games live. 1999 - CBS obtains an 11-year contract through 2013 worth $6 billion to broadcast the tournament. 2005 - College Sports Television begins a two-year agreement with CBS Sportsline.com and the NCAA for exclusive video streaming rights on CSTV.com for out-of-market game coverage. CSTV pays CBS $3 million for the rights and expects to be profitable in the first year. March 25, 2010 - In an opinion piece on ESPN.com US Secretary of Education Arne Duncan proposes that collegiate "teams that graduate fewer than 40 percent of their players should be ineligible for postseason competition and honors." April 22, 2010 - In addition to expanding the men's tournament basketball field to 68 teams from 65, the NCAA announces a 14-year, $10.8 billion television rights deal with CBS and Turner Sports. The deal, which goes into effect in 2011, marks the first time that each game will be televised nationally. April 12, 2016 - The NCAA announces an eight year extension of its TV deal with Turner Broadcasting and CBS Sports. The extension to the current deal -- for a combined total rights fee of $8.8 billion -- will keep the big game at Turner and CBS until 2032.  
1491429746	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/05/politics/congress-syria-trump-reaction/index.html	Lawmakers to Trump: Time to act on Syria - CNNPolitics.com	Washington (CNN)Republican lawmakers are ramping up their calls for the Trump administration to act against Syrian President Bashar al-Assad in the wake of Tuesday's chemical attack that killed dozens. Many Democrats, too, are pressing for actions like creating a no-fly zone and trying to bring war crimes charges against the Syrian leader. The calls are coming from many of the same lawmakers in both parties who for years urged President Barack Obama to do more to arm Syrian rebel groups and to strike the Assad regime, and now say that it's Trump's turn to act to remove Assad from power. "I don't think there is a future with Bashar al-Assad in existence," Republican Rep. Adam Kinzinger of Illinois said on CNN's "New Day." "That is something that this administration, frankly, like the last one I think failed to do -- they did in words but not in deeds — this administration is going to have to come to that reality or this problem is sadly only going to continue and get worse." On Tuesday, the Trump administration blamed Syria's attack on the Obama administration's failure to act against Assad. But at a news conference Wednesday, President Donald Trump said he is now responsible for the situation, and suggested he was considering taking additional action. RELATED: Syrian chemical attack victims gassed as they slept "I will tell you that attack on children yesterday had a big impact on me, big impact," Trump said from the White House Rose Garden. "And I have that flexibility. And it's very, very possible, and I will tell you it's already happened that my attitude toward Syria and Assad has changed very much." US Ambassador to the United Nations Nikki Haley also suggested Wednesday at a UN meeting that the US could be "compelled to take our own action." The statements earned praise from Arizona Sen. John McCain, who has been critical of the Trump administration's actions in Russia. McCain also defended Trump for blaming the attack on his predecessor. "Think those were excellent words," McCain said when asked about Trump's statement. RELATED: Trump: 'I now have responsibility' when it comes to Syria "They did chemical attacks," he continued. "Barack Obama did worse than nothing. He said he was going to do something and then didn't. And that clearly gave Bashar Assad license to kill again." But the comments from Trump and Haley were a shift from a week ago, when Secretary of State Rex Tillerson said the Syrian people would determine Assad's fate. Sen. Marco Rubio of Florida said Tillerson's remarks could have given Assad motivation to launch the latest attack. "My belief that if you're Bashar al-Assad and you read that it is no longer a priority of the United States to have you removed from power, I believe that that is an incentive to act with impunity," Rubio said at a news conference. McCain and Sen. Lindsey Graham of South Carolina met with Tillerson for an hour at the State Department on Tuesday, and McCain said Tillerson was being misinterpreted. "He said to me he realizes we've got to take action against these elements that are committing war crimes as we speak," McCain said. Graham told CNN the Trump administration needs to make clear what its policy is when it comes to Assad. "I'd be a disaster if it's a policy change, as bad as drawing the red line," Graham said. RELATED: Haley: If UN won't act on Syria, US may Trump's comments even got some begrudging praise from Democrats. "I'm pleased to see the president come away from the position that he was adopting mere days ago when he was making the point that Assad is a fact on the ground, sort of validating Assad's presence," Democratic Rep. Jim Himes of Connecticut told CNN's Wolf Blitzer. For many Democrats, Tuesday's chemical attack was the latest evidence that a safe zone is needed in Syria to protect civilians. "I think we should establish some kind of a safe zone in Syria where this humanitarian aid can be delivered to the Syrian people and with military protection for the safe zones so that, if anybody tries to mess with it, they will regret it," Virginia Sen. Tim Kaine said on CNN's "New Day." Kaine was one of a group of Democrats who were also pushing the Obama administration to take similar action against Assad. But Kaine dismissed Trump's accusations that Obama could be blamed for the chemical attack. "He's commander in chief. And when something happens and he tries to blame President Obama, give me a break," Kaine said. "And remember, when President Trump was just Donald J. Trump back then, he was urging President Obama not to do anything in Syria." Not all members of Congress condemned Assad. Speaking on CNN's "At This Hour" with Kate Bolduan, Rep. Thomas Massie, a Kentucky Republican, told the host that he didn't think the Syrian leader launched the attack, and that further intervention by the US government may aggravate the situation. "Frankly, I don't think Assad would have done that," Massie said. "It does not serve his interests." CNN's Eleanor Mueller and Ashley Killough contributed to this report. 
1491429702	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/05/golf/dustin-johnson-injures-back-ahead-of-masters/index.html	Masters 2017: Dustin Johnson injures back - CNN.com	(CNN)Dustin Johnson, the top-ranked golfer in the world, suffered a back injury Wednesday, the day before the start of the Masters Tournament. Johnson's first-round tee time is 2:03 p.m. ET Thursday. He hopes to play, according to his agent/manager David Winkle. "At roughly 3 p.m. today, Dustin took a serious fall on a staircase in his Augusta rental home," Winkle said in an emailed statement. "He landed very hard on his lower back and is now resting, although quite uncomfortably. He has been advised to remain immobile and begin a regimen of anti-inflammatory medication and icing, with the hope of being able to play tomorrow." Winkle said he would not comment further until he knew more about Johnson's condition.  
1491429554	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/04/us/lemon-oreilly-rice-twitter-cnn-tonight-cnntv/index.html	Don Lemon vs. Bill O'Reilly: Made for TV, waged on Twitter - CNN.com	(CNN)CNN's Don Lemon and FOX News' Bill O'Reilly may not go head to head on television -- O'Reilly hits cable airwaves at 8 p.m., Lemon's show begins at 10 -- but it takes more than a two-hour primetime discrepancy to keep two TV titans from squaring off on social media. On Tuesday afternoon, Lemon responded to an O'Reilly Twitter post by saying, among other things, "False." Lemon's social message was in response to an earlier tweet from the rival cable news host, one in which O'Reilly claimed Monday's edition of "CNN Tonight" failed to cover a recent story surrounding Susan Rice and alleged improper handling of national intelligence. The O'Reilly post pushed audiences to a short snippet of a Lemon segment from the previous evening, a clip featuring the anchor's pledge to not "aid and abet" those trying to misinform the American people through claims that Donald Trump or his team had been surveilled, or spied upon. Though the video was paired with a description suggesting Lemon had "declared his show a Rice-free zone," content from the program suggests otherwise. As promised off the top, Lemon and an assortment of expert guests devoted a wide swath of television time to Rice and the day's claims that President Obama's former national security adviser had used government secrets to push a political agenda. Rice has since vehemently denied the Trump administrations accusations.  
1491429538	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/05/politics/trump-syria-comments-response/index.html	Trump: 'I now have responsibility' when it comes to Syria - CNNPolitics.com	Washington (CNN)President Donald Trump, speaking at a news conference on Wednesday, said the chemical attack against Syrian civilians "crossed a lot of lines for me" and changed the way he views Syria and leader Bashar al-Assad. "I now have responsibility, and I will have that responsibility and carry it very proudly," Trump said responding to a question about a White House statement Tuesday that blamed the attack in part on President Barack Obama. "It is now my responsibility. It was a great opportunity missed," Trump said. Trump did maintain that Obama's failure to respond to his red line threat "was a blank threat (that) set us back a long ways, not only in Syria but in many other parts of the world." The President condemned the attack as "heinous." "Yesterday's chemical attack, a chemical attack that was so horrific in Syria against innocent people, including women, small children and even beautiful little babies, their deaths were an affront to humanity," Trump said from the Rose Garden. "These heinous actions by the Assad regime cannot be tolerated. The United States stands with our allies across the globe to condemn this horrific attack and all other horrific attacks, for that matter." World leaders expressed shock and outrage Tuesday at reports of the suspected targeted attack in northwestern Syria that killed scores of civilians, with one UK official suggesting the incident amounted to a war crime. Activists said the Syrian regime was responsible for killing dozens of people, including many children, leading the United Nations to replace a scheduled Security Council session for Wednesday morning with an emergency meeting. Syrian President Bashar al-Assad's military denied using chemical weapons and blamed rebels for the carnage. Russia, Syria's strong ally, said it had no warplanes in the vicinity. Rex Tillerson, Trump's Secretary of State, told reporters Wednesday that there was "no doubt in our mind that the Syrian regime under the leadership of Bashar Assad is responsible for these horrific attacks." He called on Russia to "really think carefully" about their continued support for Assad's regime in Syria. Earlier in the day, Trump had left the door open to new action in Syria in his first on-camera comments in response to a deadly suspected chemical attack in the Middle East. "You will see," Trump said when asked if he would take new action, according to pool reporters present when Trump welcomed Jordan's King Abdullah to the Oval Office. "These are very troubled times in the Middle East, and we see what happened just recently yesterday in Syria -- horrible. Horrible, horrible thing. Unspeakable," Trump said, later calling it a "terrible affront to humanity." CNN's Kareem Khadder, Schams Elwazer, Elizabeth Roberts, Eyad Kourdi, Laura Koran and Tamara Qiblawi contributed to this report. 
1491429488	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/05/politics/fighter-jet-crash-maryland/index.html	US F-16 crashes near Joint Base Andrews - CNNPolitics.com	Washington (CNN)A US F-16 crashed several miles outside Joint Base Andrews in Maryland on Wednesday, two Air Force officials told CNN. The crash took place about six miles outside the base, which is located in Prince George's County, and occurred during a routine training mission, according to Air Force officials. The pilot ejected in "an unpopulated area" and "is OK," one of the officials said, adding that the F-16 was from the 113th Fighter Wing of the Air National Guard, which is assigned to Joint Base Andrews. He landed safely about one mile from the crash site and is being treated at a nearby hospital, according to Prince George's County Acting Fire Chief Benjamin Barksdale. Police said that there have been no reports of injuries to people on the ground or damage to nearby homes, as the jet crashed in a wooded area between two communities. The debris field is located just 200 yards from some of the homes. It is "very fortunate that no lives were lost today," Barksdale said during a press conference. Large portions of the aircraft, including a wing and the fuselage, were found intact after the crash, allowing investigators to identify it as an F-16, police said. Air Force Chief of Staff Gen. David Goldfein addressed the incident at a House Armed Services hearing Wednesday morning. "If you heard jet noises driving into the Capitol, it was likely the F-16s from the 113th Air National Guard Wing at Andrews," Goldfein said. "I learned just walking in this morning that we lost an F-16 from that wing this morning. I'm proud to say at least the news reports are telling us the pilot got out and he's OK." Lockheed Martin's F-16 Fighting Falcon is a multi-role aircraft, built to carry out a variety of missions. The US Air Force currently has just over 1,000 F-16s in its inventory. Known as the "Capital Guardians," the 113th Fighter Wing is charged with defending the nation's Capital and also provides fighter, airlift and support forces capable of local, national and global employment, according to the Air Force. CNN's Jeremy Herb contributed to this report. 
1491429439	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/05/politics/trump-susan-rice-committed-crime/index.html	Offering no evidence, Trump suggests Susan Rice unmasking requests may be criminal - CNNPolitics.com	Washington (CNN)President Donald Trump said former White House National Security Adviser Susan Rice may have committed a crime when requesting to unmask the names of Trump's associates who were incidentally mentioned on intercepted communications during the Obama administration. Speaking to The New York Times Wednesday, Trump said, "I think it's going to be the biggest story." He continued,"It's such an important story for our country and the world. It is one of the big stories of our time." Trump, asked by the Times, if he believed Rice committed a crime, responded, "Do I think? Yes, I think." Trump offered no evidence to back his allegations or any names of other Obama administration officials he said were also involved. He did not suggest that his assertions came from new intelligence reports but said he would explain himself further "at the right time." In response, Erin Pelton, a spokesperson for Rice, told CNN: "I'm not going to dignify the President's ludicrous charge with a comment." Democrats on Capitol Hill blasted Trump. Rep. Adam Schiff, the top Democrat on the House intelligence committee, said that if Trump is going to accuse Rice of a crime, he should make the intelligence public. "If he's going to make accusations of criminality of anyone, he needs to show evidence to support that kind of a charge," Schiff said. "Obviously, that's not something he was either able or willing to do with respect to his accusations against Obama. It's not something I suspect he's going to be able to do with Susan Rice either." Rep. Eric Swalwell, a California Democrat on the intelligence panel, said he views the allegation as an attempt to divert attention from the ongoing probe into Russian contacts. "I don't expect they will (declassify) because I think this is just more obstruction," Swalwell said. "If he has evidence that she committed a crime, he actually can show us what his evidence is. Right now he has a credibility problem because he's been proved wrong a lot. ... This seems nothing more than buying time and obstructionism." Trump did not repeat his claim at a White House news conference shortly after the Times interview. CNN's Jeremy Herb and Tal Kopan contributed to this report. 
1491429297	http://money.cnn.com/2017/04/04/media/list-oreilly-factor-advertisers-responses/index.html	Read what Bill O'Reilly's sponsors are saying about 'disturbing allegations' of harassment - Apr. 4, 2017	O'Reilly accuser: I'm not after money Fox News' "The O'Reilly Factor" is facing a rapidly growing exodus of advertisers in the wake of a New York Times report that five different women had reached settlements over allegations of sexual harassment or verbal abuse against the show's host, Bill O'Reilly. CNNMoney has reached out to dozens of the companies that have run ads on the program. Below is a list of the responses we've received so far, as well as some responses that companies have put on their Twitter accounts after users of that site asked them about their ads. Companies pulling their ads from "The O'Reilly Factor" Mercedes-Benz: "Yes, we had advertising running on The O'Reilly Factor (we run on most major cable news shows) and it has been reassigned in the midst of this controversy. The allegations are disturbing and, given the importance of women in every aspect of our business, we don't feel this is a good environment in which to advertise our products right now." Hyundai: "Hyundai currently has no advertising on The O'Reilly Factor. We had upcoming advertising spots on the show but are reallocating them due to the recent and disturbing allegations. As a company we seek to partner with companies and programming that share our values of inclusion and diversity. We will continue to monitor and evaluate the situation as we plan future advertising decisions." BMW of North America: "In light of the recent New York Times investigation, BMW of North America has suspended its advertising with 'The O'Reilly Factor.'" Mitsubishi: "Mitsubishi Motors takes these allegations very seriously and we have decided that we will pull our advertising at the present time. We will continue to monitor this situation as we assess our long-term strategy." Lexus: "We take our duties as a responsible advertiser seriously and have been closely monitoring the situation involving 'The O'Reilly Factor.' In response, we have asked our media-buying partners to move all Lexus ad inventory out of the program." Ainsworth Pet Nutrition: "We removed our advertising from the program because of these recent and disturbing allegations." Constant Contact: "Based on the recent allegations and our strong commitment to inclusion, respect and tolerance in the workplace, we have decided to pull Constant Contact's ads from The O'Reilly Factor." Credit Karma: "In light of the recent concerning allegations, we will not be advertising on this show and have asked for our ads to be removed." Bayer: "Bayer supports a safe, respectful and non-abusive environment for women and we have reached out to Fox to voice our concerns regarding this matter. Based on the serious nature of these allegations, we have made the decision to suspend all advertising on the program in question. This suspension has been requested immediately and will be handled as expeditiously as possible. We have been informed, however, that programming changes may not become effective immediately. It is important to note that Bayer purchases packages of advertising time across all major networks without selecting placement on any specific program. We regularly evaluate our advertising purchases to make sound judgments to continue or discontinue based upon our beliefs, values and ethical considerations." TrueCar: "Pending further assessment of recent developments, we have instructed our media buyer to direct our advertising to other programming." GlaxoSmithKline: "We are continually reviewing our advertising to ensure it is conducted in a responsible manner aligned with our values. We have temporarily put a hold on spots running on The O'Reilly Factor while we assess this situation." Sanofi: "At Sanofi Consumer Healthcare, decisions about advertising on any given website, network, magazine, or programs are never undertaken as an endorsement or non-endorsement of the host, editorial or entertainment content. Rather, our purpose in advertising our product is to provide important information to consumers so that they may make an informed decision about which product will best provide relief for their symptoms. The controversy around The O'Reilly Factor program and allegations made against Bill O'Reilly are matters that we take seriously and will continue to monitor. We do not endorse the behavior or opinions of program hosts or the content. We have reallocated our current advertising originally scheduled during this program. We will continue to monitor and evaluate the situation as we plan future advertising decisions." UNTUCKit: "As a company in which more than 2/3rd of our employees are women, we take sexual harassment claims very seriously. Moreover, it is important our corporate partners reflect the same principles of inclusivity and equality upon which we have built our brand. In light of the disturbing allegations, we instructed our media buyer this morning to reallocate our ad dollars to other shows effective immediately. We will continue to closely monitor the situation but believe this is the right decision at this time." Allstate: "Inclusivity and support for women are important Allstate values. We are concerned about the issues surrounding the program and we have suspended our advertising." Esurance: "In light of the recent controversies surrounding Bill O'Reilly and his treatment of women, Esurance is suspending its advertising during "The O'Reilly Factor." At Esurance, inclusion and support for women extends across all aspects of our business — from our associates to our customers to our partners. And we want to partner with organizations and programming that share those same values." T. Rowe Price: "We regularly evaluate our media buys to ensure alignment with our corporate values, and in light of the recent allegations we have decided to pull our upcoming ads from The O'Reilly Factor." Wayfair: "We do not have any future ad buys planned for the show at this time. We condemn all forms of harassment and are closely assessing the situation. We have advertised on the show in the past and in light of the reports have moved our spots to other programming while we assess the situation." Orkin: "Orkin buys its advertising in broad dayparts on networks that reach our target audience. We do not buy specific shows, including the O'Reilly Factor. The O'Reilly Factor is in the daypart that we buy on Fox, and we have added that show to our "Do Not Buy" list in the wake of the current allegations." Society for Human Resource Management: "SHRM has determined to cease its current advertising on the Fox News Network." The Wonderful Company: "At The Wonderful Company, we are committed to a respectful and inclusive workplace enviornment and insist upon the same from our business partners. We do not currently have or plan for ad inventory on this show." Coldwell Banker: "We were disappointed that our ad ran on O'Reilly as it wasn't part of our intentional media programming. We pulled future ads from the show." H&R Block: "We share your concern about recent allegations, and no longer advertise during The O'Reilly Factor as a result." Weather Tech: "We are already working on adjusting our advertising schedule and we appreciate your feedback." Advil: "We are no longer advertising on the Bill O'Reilly show." BambooHR: "BambooHR condemns workplace harassment, and in light of recent allegations, has canceled ads on The O'Reilly Factor." Jenny Craig: "As an organization, Jenny Craig condemns any and all forms of sexual harassment. As a matter of corporate policy, we do not publicly comment on our advertising strategy. We are constantly evaluating our media buys to maximize the efficiency of our corporate investment and effectively reach our target audience. However, we can confirm that we have suspended all ads on The O'Reilly Factor." Ancestry: "Equality and respect are core values for Ancestry, especially in the workplace. We will not support those whose actions conflict with those values. To be clear, we have pulled our ads from Bill O'Reilly." Subaru: "After review, we will no longer advertise during the Bill O'Reilly show in the future." Old Dominion Freight Line: "In light of the recent allegations surrounding the Bill O'Reilly show, OD has decided to discontinue our commercials from the show." Amica Insurance: "Our ads on The O'Reilly Factor are being pulled. It may take a few days for this to occur." LegalZoom: "This was not part of our intentional media programming and we have pulled all ads from this show." Invisalign: "Align Technology is redirecting its media buy for Invisalign spots and will not advertise on/around The O'Reilly Factor." Pacific Life: "As of today, Pacific Life is no longer an advertiser on the O'Reilly Factor." Visionworks: "Visionworks' media buy was with Fox News, not with any show specifically. Once we learned about the allegations, we pulled our ads from the program. Our media strategy is built around programming that aligns with our company's, and our customer's, core values. We continually review our advertising strategy and update on a quarterly basis, however when situations arise, we are able to work with our media partners to act swiftly to ensure our core values are embodied. After recent allegations on "The O'Reilly Factor," Visionworks has pulled all ads." Stanley Steemer: "We are in the process of removing our commercials from 'The O'Reilly Factor."' Carfax: "For more than 30 years, CARFAX has been working hard as a consumer advocate to give Americans the facts about used cars. The ongoing controversy over The O'Reilly Factor is a distraction from our mission to help millions of consumers. Therefore, we have instructed FOX News to remove our advertising from the program." Eli Lilly and Company: "Eli Lilly and Company has suspended its advertising on The O'Reilly Factor for now." Allstar Products Group: "It was a corporate decision for Allstar Products Group to pull the media." Propane Council: "The Proudly Propane campaign is no longer advertising on The O'Reilly Factor, effective immediately." Reddi Whip: "We've received some questions about our advertising presence on the O'Reilly Factor. We are removing the show from our advertising plans." GoodRx: "After review, GoodRx will no longer advertise on The O'Reilly Factor. We are in the process of removing our ads." Southern New Hampshire University: "In light of recent allegations, SNHU has pulled all advertising from The O'Reilly Factor. As a University, we value diversity, inclusion, and respect for all, and we take every measure to ensure our advertising is consistent with our core values." Touchnote: "We requested that our commercials won't run on the show. Sadly pre-booked spots may still air." BeenVerified: "At this time, we're pulling our advertisements on The O'Reilly Factor. We continually monitor our advertising to make sure it aligns with our company values." Consumer Cellular: "We can confirm that Consumer Cellular has removed our advertising from 'The O'Reilly Factor' show." MileIQ: "We take this very seriously & are addressing it. As the cancellation takes effect, some prebooked spots may still air." Peloton: "Peloton has currently suspended advertising on The O'Reilly Factor in light of the recent allegations against the show's host, which are in direct opposition to our company's core values." Companies currently evaluating whether or not to keep advertising on "The O'Reilly Factor" Trivago: "We are constantly reviewing our media buys to ensure we do not support any behavior that contradicts trivago's corporate values. We are currently reviewing the information available, but do not discuss our advertising strategy publicly." Enterprise Holdings: "We are looking into this, but we haven't made any decisions." TD Ameritrade: "We don't have a direct media buy with the program, and we have only run advertising on the show once in the last quarter. We have no plans to run anything else, at a minimum, until much later in the spring. Harassment in any form is unacceptable, and because one of our core values is People Matter, this is a situation that we are monitoring closely. If we need to make additional changes to our media buying strategy down the road, we have the flexibility to do so." Expedia: "We regularly evaluate all of our media buying, as we are doing now with regard to this program." Companies that will continue to advertise on "The O'Reilly Factor" Angie's List: "The advertising strategy we have long used at Angie's List is meant to reach as many people as possible with news that our service exists and is available to them. We place ads across a wide spectrum of venues intending to reach as many viewers/listeners/ readers as possible without taking a position on the viewpoints of the venues themselves. Just as we trust members to make their own hiring decisions, we trust them to make their own media consumption decisions." Companies that have ceased advertising on "The O'Reilly Factor" for other reasons CFP Board: "CFP Board does not have a partnership or a sponsorship with Fox News. Our television advertising is purchased through an advertising network where the advertisements are placed on multiple cable television channels and shows. As our spring flight is winding down, we will no longer have any placements on Fox News." Companies that aren't saying Quincy Bioscience: "We don't publicly comment on our advertising. As a company we condemn all forms of sexual harassment." CNNMoney (New York) First published April 4, 2017: 1:29 PM ET
1491429269	http://www.cnn.com/2016/07/26/travel/best-department-stores/index.html	World's best department stores for shoppers who love classics - CNN.com	(CNN)Imagine a shop where you can buy everything... OK, OK, yes we've heard of the Internet, but we were thinking of an actual real-life shop. Because there's something about a physical store that online shopping just can't replace. And nothing beats a classic department store. In addition to selling stacks of different merchandise and brands, these extravagantly designed stores-within-stores offer something else -- an experience. "Historically the big downtown department stores were almost like city centers," says Jan Whitaker, a department store historian who's penned two books on these emporiums of commerce. "They offered so many services in addition to all the latest products and fashions that they were really more than just stores." Here are 14 city-like department stores that are worth the trip, even for nonshoppers: 1. Le Bon Marche, Paris Often considered the world's first modern department store, Le Bon Marche Rive Gauche has been the chicest place to shop in Paris since its opening in 1852. And being top of the chic list in Paris takes some doing. From the get-go, Le Bon Marche was an innovator coming up with ideas, like reading rooms for idle husbands, that were imitated around the world. As well as its swish merchandise, Le Bon Marche also boasts an impressive art collection that's exhibited around the store. In early 2016, the store was the first retail space to host Chinese artist Ai Weiwei's "Child's Play" exhibition -- showcasing two dozen whimsical bamboo and paper installations. The store's 3,000-square-meter food market La Grande Epicerie is a slice of French food heaven. Located along the Left Bank of the Seine, the store is less crowded than its counterparts on the other side of the river, making it popular with celebrities and with locals. World's 12 best shopping cities 2. Selfridges, London No department store list is complete without Selfridges. Founded in 1909, Selfridges has been voted as the world's best department store at the last three biennial Global Department Store Summits. The store, on London's Oxford Street central shopping drag, has a shrine-like shoe gallery -- the world's biggest for both men and women. In 2014, it splurged a whopping $432 million on creating the world's biggest accessories department. Its summer pop-up rooftop restaurants are as highly anticipated as its famous Christmas windows. In fact, it has the biggest Yuletide obsession in town -- its festive shop opened in August last year. London: Insider Travel Guide 3. Bergdorf Goodman, New York When a department store inspires a documentary titled "Scatter My Ashes at Bergdorf's," it's clearly not just any old shop. Bergdorf Goodman on Fifth Avenue is where Carrie Bradshaw from "Sex and the City," like the rest of New York's most fashionable, stocks her wardrobe. There are also departments dedicated to home, books and children -- plus restaurants. Bergdorf owns a separate three-story men's department across the street. Feeling lost? The upmarket store also boasts an army of personal shoppers, including 88-year-old Betty Halbreich, dubbed the most famous personal shopper in the world. Her office Betty Halbreich Solutions sits on the third floor. 3 perfect meals: New York City 4. GUM, Moscow Moscow's national department store GUM on Red Square has a rich and mysterious history that few can rival. It's survived more than a century of tumult after opening in 1890. The 242-meter-long, three-story structure escaped the bulldozer three times. And it became Joseph Stalin's office in the 1920s. Its lavish toilets were shut down for being a bourgeois luxury in 1918. One of them -- branded Historic Toilet -- has now been restored to its pre-revolutionary grandeur, and is open to anyone willing to spend $1.30 (or $7.50 for shower room with bathrobe, towels and slippers for ladies). Its Communist era hasn't been forgotten -- there are two Soviet-themed cafes, Festivalnoe and Stolovaya No 57. An ice rink opens each winter. Moscow: Insider Travel Guide 5. Illums Bolighus, Copenhagen The 75-year-old Illums Bolighus in Copenhagen is a four-story heaven for design fanatics. With six other stores around Denmark, Norway and Sweden, Illums Bolighus aims to showcase the best of Scandinavian minimalist design. It also carries international brands that match its sleek style. The store stocks everything home-related, from kitchen equipment to furniture to bed and bath products from Nordic and international brands. Products from famed Danish designers Arne Jacobsen, Finn Juhl, Borge Mogensen and Hans J. Wegner have been featured in the store since the 1950s. Obsessed with Danish lamps? Well who isn't? The third floor is where the magic's at. UNESCO's newest World Heritage Sites 6. Isetan, Tokyo Generating the highest sales of any department store in Japan, Isetan's flagship store in Shinjuku is a massive nine-floor shopping maze. Plus there's a roof garden. Standing behind it is Isetan Men's -- another mind-boggling 10-floor department store dedicated, unsurprisingly, to men. The two buildings are connected by a bridge on the third and sixth floor. Isetan Men's houses a golf school on its roof. Like most department stores in Japan, Isetan has an impressive food market in the basement, especially for exquisite-looking desserts. Its promotional hall and a kimono department are on the top floor. Tokyo: Insider Travel Guide 7. Galeries Lafayette, Paris Golden art nouveau interior. Balconies inspired by the Paris Opera House. A magnificent glass dome ceiling. Galeries Lafayette on Boulevard Haussmann in Paris is the epitome of the golden age of department stores. Not just a retail space for upscale merchandise, the glamorous store is such a dazzling spectacle it's a top tourist attraction in its own right. A free 45-minute tour of the Haussmann store is available upon request for parties between 10 to 20 people. Its rooftop terrace offers great views of the French capital. France's most beautiful destinations 8. Harrods, London It's hard to decide where to start looking inside Harrods. Once a humble drapery store, Harrods is now the biggest and the most extravagant -- in terms of installations -- department store in Europe, with a retail space of 90,000 square meters. There's the $39 million "Egyptian" escalator in the middle of the store. Recent renovations have also added a new eye-popping "amber and gold" chandelier by American artist Dale Chihuly. Harrods goes by the motto "omnia omnibus ubique" (Latin for "all things for all people everywhere"). Needless to say, almost everything can be found in this seven-story building. Last year it even started selling property. Until 2014, it had an animal department -- where former U.S. President Ronald Reagan once bought a baby elephant and playwright Noel Coward purchased an alligator. Harrods also once deployed a cobra to guard a pair of sandals (studded with ruby and diamond) that was valued at about $90,000 (£62,000). England's most beautiful destinations 9. Kaufhaus des Westens, Berlin Kaufhaus des Westens (commonly known as KaDeWe) is the largest department store in mainland Europe, spanning 60,000 square meters of retail space. The historic establishment -- first opened in 1907 -- was severely damaged when an American plane crashed into the building during World War II. That didn't stop business for long. It was restored in 1950 and has stood as a significant landmark of post-war Berlin ever since. KaDeWe's food hall is one of the biggest in the world, selling about 35,000 different products and hosting more than 30 gourmet bars helmed by 150 chefs. The 109-year-old store recently commissioned a Rotterdam-based architecture firm to redesign its interior space. The current plan looks refreshing with cool escalators and more glass on top. 11 things Germany does better than anywhere else 10. Nordiska Kompaniet, Stockholm Standing in the heart of Stockholm, Nordiska Kompaniet (NK) is Sweden's oldest luxury department store. "[NK was] founded by Josef Sachs in 1902 with a vision for it to become a cultural and commercial theater," a spokesperson tells CNN. "The store has become both a meeting place and cultural institution that continues to be the stage for many exclusive launches and appearances." NK was the first place in Sweden to sell Barbie dolls and jeans. It also had the first escalator in the country. Its beautiful atrium with marble floor and brass banisters has remained unchanged since 1915. "The marble in the floor is Swedish marble from Kolmarden," says the spokesperson. One of NK's best secrets are its mints. They're produced using a 100-year-old recipe each morning by the in-store bakery -- which many people don't know exists. 20 of Europe's most beautiful hotels 11. 10 Corso Como, Milan Not anyone's idea of a traditional idea of a department store, 10 Corso Como was among the originators of the widely imitated concept store. Having begun life as an art gallery and book store in a converted garage in 1991, 10 Corso Como soon grew into a celebrated dining and shopping destination. Founder Carla Sozzani hopes to promote the idea of slow shopping through her carefully curated selection. Its eclectic space showcases hot and bold fashion labels from Vetements to Maison Martin Margiela. Its book shop has an artistic focus, especially photography. The beauty section stocks some of the rarest fragrances in the world. It also has a restaurant, a courtyard garden and a mini hotel. The boutique department store now has outposts in Seoul, Shanghai and Beijing. Secret past: Inside Milan's crumbling Art Deco 'day hotel' 12. Eslite Spectrum Songyan Store, Taipei Mainly known for its book-selling business, Eslite Spectrum doesn't fit the usual department store profile. The 27-year-old alternative store sells various lifestyle products, including specialty foods and handicrafts from Taiwan. "From its very beginning, Eslite has developed a comprehensive business model centered on culture, creativity and cares for humanity," director of Eslite's public affairs division Sheersong Tseng tells CNN. The lifestyle brand now owns more than 40 stores around Taiwan and Hong Kong, as well as one in China. "The space, services and events are all designed according to the traits of the city in which the store is located," says Tseng. "Therefore no two Eslite Spectrum stores are alike." Our favorite is Eslite Spectrum in Songyan, a former tobacco factory turned creative park. The new building, designed by Japanese architect Toyo Ito, houses two interesting sub-sections. Axes features edgy street apparels from 36 Taiwanese designers. Expo is a platform for creative lifestyle products by hundreds of brands. "Visitors can also participate in handicraft classes such as pottery, glass, wood, metalwork, hand-crafted music boxes and paper art," says Tseng. Taipei: Insider Travel Guide 13. Barneys New York Just to prove department stores will prevail in the era of online retail, here's one that's freshly opened in 2016. OK, so the original Barneys originally opened close to this 7th Avenue spot in 1923, but this is a new incarnation of the chic fashion store. The 5,388-square-meter new premises was designed by New York-based Steven Harris Architects firm. The interior is decked out in cool muted colors, with touches of brass. Its five floors are connected by a four-story atrium and an elegant spiral staircase -- a concept inspired by the old store. "I think if you ask anyone who remembers the original store, the thing that everyone recalls is the stair," Steven Harris tells Barneys' blog The Window. "That was the thing that was the most beautiful, but it was also about display and an element of performance -- being watched as you descended the stairs. "It was truly the center of the space and the most dramatic element." Barneys New York, 101 7th Avenue, New York City 12 things to do in New York City 14. Nihonbashi Mitsukoshi Main Store, Tokyo Japan's oldest department store chain had an unusual hire last year -- a kimono-wearing android. Aiko Chihira, the Toshiba-developed robot is in charge of the information desk at Mitsukoshi department store in Nihonbashi, Tokyo. Chihira, pretty and aged 32, can't answer inquiries yet but can offer directions by running through a pre-recorded message in Japanese. Mitsukoshi's main store in Nihonbashi may not be Tokyo's most fashion-forward store -- that honor goes to Laforet Harajuku -- but the century-old store has a renowned gentleman's department. Need a color analyst to pick out a tie that matches your skin? Seeking a new tailored suit? This is the right place. $27,000 melons? Inside Japan's luxury fruit habit Maggie Hiufu Wong is a former CNN staff writer now working as a freelance journalist in London. 
1491429230	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/05/politics/navy-t-45-training-jet-fleet-pause/index.html	Navy puts 'safety pause' on trainer jet fleet - CNNPolitics.com	(CNN)The US Navy has implemented a "safety pause" for its fleet of T-45 training jets, according to a US official, a move that comes just days after more than 100 instructional pilots refused to fly in protest of continuing issues with the aircraft's oxygen system. The two-day temporary grounding of all T-45 Goshawks will give Navy officials time to assess the concerns related to the rising rate of "physiological episodes" affecting pilots. Reported physiological episodes resulting in dizzyness or even blackouts have been caused by oxygen contamination, human factors -- including air sickness and vertigo, failure of the on-board oxygen generation system and the failure of other key systems -- according to testimony last week from Rear Adm. Michael Moran. The number of physiological episodes affecting T-45 pilots per year has quadrupled since 2012, according Moran, a troubling trend that has also been identified in Navy pilots who fly F-18s and EA-18G Growlers. But determining the root cause of the issue is complicated by the fact that more than one factor can be attributed to a single physiological event. Instructional pilots started to boycott training flights last Thursday, after raising concerns that commanders were not doing enough to fix the urgent safety problem despite being informed of the risk. "Last Friday, we had roughly 40% of our flights canceled in the T-45 training commands in Meridian, Pensacola and Kingsville because of operational risk management concerns voiced by the instructor pilots," Navy spokesperson Cdr. Jeanette Groeneveld said in a statement. "We take the concerns of our aircrew seriously and have directed a three day operational pause for the T-45 community to allow time for naval aviation leadership to engage with the pilots, hear their concerns and discuss the risk mitigations as well as the efforts that are ongoing to correct this issue," she added. And a US defense official told CNN earlier that some Navy officers had been covering up the pilots' initial refusal to fly by citing technical and other issues with the aircraft, raising questions about a breakdown in the chain of command. Fox News first reported the pilots' decision not to fly, a move that essentially led to the grounding of hundreds of training flights. After being questioned on the issue, Adm. John Richardson reiterated the Navy's commitment to resolving the issue during testimony before the House Armed Services Committee Wednesday, calling it the "the top safety priority for naval aviation." "It's a complex problem and requires a multidimensional solution, first and foremost is the human dimension and communication," Richardson said, downplaying disagreement between instructional pilots and senior officers as a "breakdown in communication." "We are making sure that we are listening and they all feel like they can be talking to leadership so we understand where their anxiety and concerns are," he added. The Navy has also developed training to make sure pilots recognize the symptoms of hypoxia and understand the appropriate emergency procedures. Hypoxia results from deficiency in the amount of oxygen delivered to cells and can induce potentially fatal complications. But frustration over the lack of a permanent solution led to last week's boycott and Wednesday's two-day pause. "That's a pretty serious thing when pilots say they're not going to fly," Rep. Martha McSally, an Arizona Republican who questioned Richardson about the issue, told CNN following Wednesday's hearing. "To get to the point where you have them saying we're not flying and we don't think our leadership is listening, which is what you're hearing out of these pilots ... that's pretty severe," McSally, a former Air Force pilot, added. CNN's Jeremy Herb contributed to this report. 
1491429176	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/05/politics/schwarzenegger-trump-after-school-cuts/index.html	Arnold Schwarzenegger accuses Trump of 'robbing (children) blind' - CNNPolitics.com	Arnold Schwarzenegger joins Van Jones for a live edition of "The Messy Truth," airing Wednesday at 9 p.m. ET on CNN. Los Angeles (CNN)Arnold Schwarzenegger found himself in familiar territory Wednesday: taking aim at President Donald Trump. This time, the actor and former California governor blasted the President over his proposed $1.2 billion cut to after-school programs. "President Trump promised us he wants to 'make America great again.' That's not how you make America great, by taking $1.2 billion from the children and robbing them blind," Trump said in front of hundreds of program leaders at the National After-School Summit at the University of Southern California's Schwarzenegger Institute. "Why would he do that?" he said of the Trump budget's proposed elimination of the 21st Century Community Learning Center grant program. "Why would he want to balance the budget on the backs of those kids?" Schwarzenegger vowed to put up a fight in Washington, calling the after-school program leaders in attendance "terminators." "When I look at you, I see a bunch of warriors," he said. "We're going to go to Washington, and we're not going to take this lying down." His comments come on the heels of a feud between Trump and Schwarzenegger over the latter's low-rated version of "The New Celebrity Apprentice." Trump, who is the show's executive producer, blamed the ratings slide on Schwarzenegger. Arnold shot back in a video released on social media: "Hey, Donald, I have a great idea. Why don't we switch jobs?" Schwarzenegger said. "You take over TV because you're such an expert on ratings, and I take over your job, and then people can finally sleep comfortably again." Schwarzenegger announced last month that he won't return for another season of the show. Later in the summit, during an on-stage Q-and-A with CNN's Van Jones, Schwarzenegger addressed the need for holding Congress accountable, rather than "complaining in front of your television set." "Congress has a 15% approval rating -- which is below herpes or colonoscopies," Schwarzenegger quipped, to laughs from the audience. "But 98% of them get re-elected." Still, it was clear that summit organizers recognized the importance of Congress in protecting funding for after-school programs after Trump's budget chief, Mick Mulvaney, said there's "no demonstrable evidence" the programs are working. A video of Sen. Lisa Murkowski, R-Alaska, was played in front of program leaders, in which she said, "This is not a time to panic." Murkowski, who co-sponsored legislation supporting after-school programs, urged attendees of the summit to "re-energize" and to prove to Congress the importance of the programs in their states. Schwarzenegger, who said the programs help millions of children every year, added: "Keep pumping! Reps, reps, reps. We'll never stop until we get there!"  
1491430368	http://www.cnn.com/2012/12/07/world/pope-benedict-xvi---fast-facts/index.html	Pope Emeritus Benedict XVI Fast Facts - CNN.com	(CNN)Here's a look at Pope Emeritus Benedict XVI's life. Personal: Birth date: April 16, 1927 Birth place: Marktl am Inn, Germany Birth name: Joseph Aloisius Ratzinger Father: Joseph Ratzinger, a police officer Mother: Maria Ratzinger Education: University of Munich, doctorate in theology, 1953 Religion: Roman Catholic Other Facts: The first pope to resign since Gregory XII in 1415. Served as chief theological adviser to Pope John Paul II. Positions held: Prefect of Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith, President of the Pontifical Biblical Commission and International Theological Commission and Dean of the College of Cardinals As dean of the College of Cardinals, it was his duty to call the cardinals to Rome for conclave after the death of Pope John Paul II. Is an accomplished pianist and loves Mozart. Timeline: 1945 - During World War II, he deserts the German army and is taken prisoner by the US Army. June 29, 1951 - Is ordained as a priest. 1959-1969 - Teaches theology at various colleges in Germany. 1969 - Vice president and professor of theology at the University of Regensburg in Germany. March 1977 - Is named Archbishop of Munich and Freising and is consecrated on May 28, 1977. June 27, 1977 - Is made a cardinal by Pope Paul VI. November 25, 1981 - Is named Prefect of the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith; President of the Biblical Commission and of the Pontifical International Theological Commission. November 6, 1998 - Is elected vice dean of the College of Cardinals. November 30, 2002 - Is named the dean of the College of Cardinals. April 19, 2005 - Is elected the 265th pope by 115 cardinals. April 24, 2005 - His inaugural Mass takes place. August 19, 2005 - Becomes the second pope in history to visit a synagogue when he speaks at the Roonstrasse Synagogue in Cologne, Germany. January 25, 2006 - Issues his first encyclical, focusing on the subjects of love, eros, charity and politics. March 24, 2006 - Holds his first consistory and formally elevates 15 men to the level of cardinal. The next day, a ceremony is held in Saint Peter's Square in which the pope presents each of the new cardinals with a golden ring to symbolize their fidelity to the church. May 25, 2006 - Travels to Poland to pay homage to the late Pope John Paul II. He visits John Paul's birth home in Wadowice, and travels to Krakow, the city where John Paul II lived before he assumed the papacy in 1978. Benedict XVI also visits the Auschwitz-Birkenau concentration camp. September 12-20, 2006 - Gives a speech in Bavaria, Germany that includes quotes from 14th-century Byzantine emperor Manuel II Paleologus, regarding Islam and the Prophet Mohammed. The speech sparks protests by Muslims around the world and causes the recall of the Moroccan envoy to the Vatican. The pope apologizes for the offense to the Muslim world. November 28, 2006 - Arrives in Turkey for his first visit as pope. May 9, 2007 - Arrives in Brazil for a six day visit, his first as pope. June 9, 2007 - Meets with US President George W. Bush at the Vatican, the first meeting between the two. Their discussions include Iraq, Muslim relations, and AIDS. September 7-9, 2007 - The pope travels to Austria for the 850th anniversary of the Mariazell shrine. October 28, 2007 - The pope beatifies 498 victims of the Spanish Civil War of the 1930s. It is the largest mass beatification in history. November 24, 2007 - Elevates 23 senior clergy to the position of cardinal. April 15-20, 2008 - Visits the United States for the first time as pope. April 17, 2008 - Holds Mass at Nationals Park in Washington, DC with an estimated 46,000 in attendance. Later in the day, meets with Bernie McDaid, Olan Horne, and Faith Johnston, three victims of sexual abuse by clergymen. April 18, 2008 - Delivers a speech to the United Nations General Assembly. April 19, 2008 - Celebrates Mass at St. Patrick's Cathedral. April 20, 2008 - Prays at ground zero in lower Manhattan, before leading a Mass at Yankee Stadium in front of 60,000 people. October 12, 2008 - Canonizes four new saints, including the first female saint from India. February 12, 2009 - Makes a statement denouncing anti-Semitism a month after a scandal involving a bishop who denied the death toll of Jews killed in concentration camps during World War II. March 17-23, 2009 - Makes his first trip to Africa as pope, traveling to Cameroon and Angola, and reaffirms the Catholic Church's ban on condom use. April 26, 2009 - Names five new saints: Rev. Arcangelo Tadini, Nuno Alvares Pereira, Bernardo Tolomei, Gertrude Comensoli and Caterina Volpicelli. May 8-15, 2009 - Makes his first trip to the Middle East - making stops in Jordan and Israel to meet with Israeli and Palestinian leaders. July 17, 2009 - Has surgery after breaking his wrist in a fall while on vacation. August 3, 2009 - The pope signs record deal with Geffen Records to record his songs and prayers to the Virgin Mary. November 23, 2009 - The pope's new album, "Alma Mater," is released. June 11, 2010 - During a Mass at Saint Peter's Basilica, the pope asks forgiveness for sexual abuse within the church and promises to do more to stop future incidents. July 15, 2010 - The Vatican announces the toughening of its laws on priests involved in sexual abuse. September 16-19, 2010 - The pope travels to England and Scotland, the first official visit to the United Kingdom by a pope. Pope John Paul II made a pastoral visit in 1982. September 16, 2010 - The pope makes a statement that the Roman Catholic Church has not been vigilant enough or fast enough in responding to the problem of sexual abuse by priests. June 28, 2011 - The pope sends his first tweet, via the Vatican's Twitter account, to announce the launch of the new Vatican website. The tweet is prepared in advance for the pope, but he presses the send button. March 26-28, 2012 - The pope visits Cuba. He celebrates Mass in Revolution Plaza and also meets with the country's former leader, Fidel Castro. May 26, 2012 - The Vatican announces that Pope Benedict XVI's butler Paolo Gabriele has been arrested for illegal possession of confidential documents. He is suspected of leaking documents to journalist Gianluigi Nuzzi, author of the controversial book "Sua Santita." October 6, 2012 - The pope's former butler, Paolo Gabriele, is convicted of aggravated theft for leaking confidential papal documents and sentenced to 18 months in prison. October 21, 2012 - Names seven new saints, two of them Americans: 17th century Mohawk Kateri Tekakwitha, the first Native American, and Marianne Cope, a nun who devoted 30 years of her life helping lepers in Hawaii. The five other new saints are 19th century French Jesuit Jacques Berthieu, Pedro Calungsod of the Philippines, Giovanni Battista Piamarta, Maria Carmen Salles y Barangueras and Anna Schaffer. November 21, 2012 - The pope's book "Jesus of Nazareth: The Infancy Narratives" is released. In the book, the pope claims the Christian calendar is based on a mistake by a sixth century monk, who was several years off in his calculation of Jesus' birth date. December 3, 2012 - The pope's Twitter account goes live in seven languages and has thousands of followers within minutes. February 11, 2013 - Pope Benedict XVI announces that he will retire, effective February 28. He cites his "advanced age" as the reason. February 28, 2013 - Pope Benedict XVI leaves the Vatican by helicopter for the papal retreat in Castel Gandolfo. He is expected to remain there while the next pope is chosen. Benedict XVI will then return to the Vatican to live in a former gardener's house. He makes his last remarks as Pope from the balcony at Castel Gandolfo, saying, "I am simply a pilgrim beginning the last leg of his pilgrimage on this earth." At 8 pm local time (2 pm EST) Benedict XVI's reign officially ends. May 2, 2013 - Returns to live in the Vatican alongside Pope Francis. February 22, 2014 - Pope Emeritus Benedict XVI makes a surprise appearance at St. Peter's Basilica as Pope Francis creates 19 new cardinals. April 27, 2014 - Attends the canonization ceremony of popes John XXIII and John Paul II as a guest. November 2016 - Benedict XVI's book "Last Testament: In His Own Words," co-written by Peter Seewald, is released.  
1491430339	http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/30/travel/most-remote-islands/index.html	Remote islands: 7 of world's hardest-to-reach outposts - CNN.com	Idiotic TV shows and all the latest apps bumming you out on the 21st century? Ready for some "me time" on the world's remotest islands? Forget golden sands and swaying palms -- the reality of solitude is different as these distant landfalls demonstrate. 1. Tristan da Cunha 1,750 miles from South Africa The British island group of Tristan da Cunha stands profoundly alone in the South Atlantic. The nearest landfall is South Africa, 1,750 miles east, and to the west, South America is more than 2,000 miles. It's the world's most remote inhabited island chain -- so precariously occupied that when a volcanic vent erupted in 1961, the whole population was evacuated to England. Reaching Tristan da Cunha: This is no easygoing excursion. To quote the official website, "There are no package tours for independent travelers, no hotels, no airport, no holiday reps, no night clubs, no restaurants, no jet skis nor safe sea swimming." All visitors need to clear their arrivals in advance through the Island Council, and they also need to obtain a police certificate. (A 40-day wait is typical.) There are around 10 sailings a year from Cape Town, South Africa, and Namibia, each taking five to six days to reach the islands; it costs $800-$1,500 for a round trip. A list of available ships can be found on the official website: www.tristandc.com. 2. Bear Island 400 miles off Europe's north coast Bjornoya, better known as Bear Island, is the southernmost island in the Arctic archipelago of Svalbard, 400 miles north of mainland Europe -- but only on paper, given that it's almost 150 miles south of the Norwegian island chain with which it's lumped. It's been a nature reserve since 2002 and has a lively history of failed occupation -- hard to believe for a place of barren cliffs, near-zero precipitation and risk of leaks of radioactive material from the nearby wreck of a nuclear submarine. Reaching Bear Island: Getting to the heart of Svalbard is a relatively simple matter -- there are daily flights from Oslo and Tromso to Svalbard's capital, Longyearbyen, on the west coast of Spitsbergen. Now it gets tricky. Research vessels infrequently call on Bear Island (the Norwegian Polar Institute makes an occasional appearance), while individually chartered boats and the occasional adventure cruise (such as this one from Polar Quest) haul in the remaining visitors. 3. Bouvet 1,000 miles from Antarctica Tristan da Cunha is the remotest inhabited island in the world -- now, welcome to its uninhabited, far bleaker counterpart. Its cliffs are sheer. It's almost entirely covered by a glacier. In winter, its seas are pack ice. And its nearest neighbor is Antarctica, 1,000 miles to the south. In short, idyllic. Reaching Bouvet: The entire island is a nature reserve -- so unless you can make a compelling case for visiting, you'll be blocked by Norwegian authorities. Get permission, and it's now a simple matter of finding a research vessel, quickly mastering a valuable skill such as arctic geological surveying or marine biology and then getting someone to land you via helicopter. (There are no ports or harbors.) If all else fails, try becoming an amateur radio enthusiast: In 1990, a multinational expedition of operators spent 16 days on the island. 4. Bishop Rock 30 miles from England Regarded by Guinness as the world's smallest island with a building on it, Bishop Rock stands at the end of Britain's Isles of Scilly, where coastal waters give way to the fury of the Atlantic. In 1847, engineers started building an iron lighthouse there -- and it washed away in a storm. Its extraordinary successor, first lit in 1858, stands to this day. Reaching Bishop Rock: Visiting the most southwesterly point in Britain is surprisingly easy -- the St. Mary's Boatsmen's Association runs day trips. But as Martin Hesp notes, even on a "calm" day you're in for serious chop. 5. Boreray 60 miles off mainland Scotland Love the Scottish islands, but want something with a little more bite? Head west of the Outer Hebrides, and you'll find the archipelago of St. Kilda, 40 miles into the Atlantic. It's one of Scotland's five World Heritage sites, with a main island that was abandoned in the 1930s when crops failed. Imagine the surprise of archaeologists when they found that one of the least hospitable islands, Boreray, was occupied in prehistoric times. Reaching Boreray: Since Boreray comes under the protection of the National Trust for Scotland, you need its permission to visit. Then? Lots of time and lots of luck -- with a rugged shoreline and savage sea swell, this isn't an island built for landings. According to one guide, more people have reached the summit of Everest than have landed at Boreray since the National Trust took ownership in 1957. 6. North Sentinel Island 400 miles from Myanmar North Sentinel is one of the 572 islands making up the Andaman chain in the Indian Ocean's Bay of Bengal. It's surrounded by dangerous reefs, but North Sentinel is intimidating because of its inhabitants. The Sentinelese want nothing to do with the modern world and have repeatedly rebuffed attempts to make peaceful contact. Reaching North Sentinel Island: You're kidding, right? If the above description didn't put you off, this article about a pair of fishermen who strayed onto the island certainly should. 7. Rockall 270 miles from Ireland If you think Boreray sounds forbidding, try sailing 187 miles west of it. Rockall is the tip of an extinct volcano reaching 20 meters (about 65 feet) above sea level, in seas with waves recorded as high as 29 meters (95 feet). In 1955, the British Empire, in its final territorial acquisition, seized Rockall -- allegedly due to fears the Soviets would build a missile battery on it. Reaching Rockall: In the words of the recently minted Rockall Club, "visiting Rockall is difficult, completely weather dependent and not cheap." Your best bet is contacting Kilda Cruises and arranging a tailor-made excursion. Or you could sail there, lash yourself to the rock and claim it as your very own micronation -- but you wouldn't be the first. MORE ISLAND TRAVEL IDEAS: 12 crowd-free Asia island escapes A South Pacific Island for every taste 10 gorgeous Mediterranean islands you probably haven't heard of  
1491430227	http://www.cnn.com/2016/12/21/us/jeff-sessions-fast-facts/index.html	Jeff Sessions Fast Facts - CNN.com	(CNN)Here's a look at the life of Jeff Sessions, US attorney general and former Republican senator of Alabama. Personal: Birth date: December 24, 1946 Birth place: Selma, Alabama Birth name: Jefferson Beauregard Sessions III Father: Jefferson Beauregard Sessions Jr., business owner Mother: Abbie (Powe) Sessions Marriage: Mary Blackshear Sessions (1969-present) Children: Mary Abigail, Ruth and Samuel Education: Huntingdon College, B.A., 1969; University of Alabama, J.D., 1973 Military service: US Army Reserve, 1973-1986, Captain Religion: Methodist Other Facts: Is an Eagle Scout. Serves on the Senate Budget, Judiciary, Armed Services, and Environment and Public Works Committees. Voted against both of President Barack Obama's Supreme Court nominees, Sonia Sotomayor and Elena Kagan. Supports building fencing along the US border, saying in 2006 that "good fences make good neighbors." Opponent of the 2013 "Gang of Eight" immigration reform bill. Timeline: 1973-1975 - Practices law in Alabama. 1975-1977 - Assistant US Attorney for the Southern District of Alabama. 1981-1993 - US Attorney for the Southern District of Alabama. 1986 - President Ronald Reagan nominates Sessions to become a federal judge. The Senate Judiciary Committee opposes the nomination following testimony that Sessions made racist remarks and called the NAACP and ACLU "un-American." 1995-1997- Alabama Attorney General. During this time, an Alabama judge accuses Sessions of prosecutorial misconduct related to the handling of evidence in a case but ultimately, Sessions is not disciplined for ethics violations. 1996 - Elected to the US Senate. Re-elected in 2002, 2008 and 2014. 1997-February 2017 - Republican senator representing Alabama. February 2, 2009 - Votes in favor of the confirmation of Eric Holder as attorney general. April 23, 2015 - Votes against the confirmation of Loretta Lynch as attorney general. February 28, 2016 - Becomes the first sitting US senator to endorse Donald Trump's presidential bid. November 18, 2016 - President-elect Donald Trump announces he intends to nominate Sessions to be the next attorney general. January 3, 2017 - An NAACP sit-in to protest the nomination of Sessions as US attorney general ends when six people are arrested at Sessions' Mobile, Alabama, office. February 8, 2017 - After 30 hours of debate, the US Senate confirms Sessions as attorney general by a 52-47 vote. March 1, 2017 - The Washington Post reports that Sessions failed to disclose pre-election meetings with the top Russian diplomat in Washington. Sessions did not mention either meeting during his confirmation hearings when he said he knew of no contacts between Trump surrogates and Russians. March 2, 2017 - Sessions recuses himself from any involvement in a Justice Department probe into links between the Trump campaign and Moscow. April 3, 2017 - The Justice Department releases a memorandum ordering a review of consent decrees and other police reforms overseen by the federal government in response to complaints of civil rights abuses and public safety issues. During his confirmation hearing, Sessions expressed skepticism about the effectiveness of Justice Department interventions in local police matters.  
1491430190	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/05/cnn10/ten-content-thurs/index.html	CNN 10 - April 6, 2017 - CNN.com	April 6, 2017 As U.S. President Donald Trump prepares to meet with Chinese President Xi Jinping, how do the two leaders differ on their approaches to North Korea? And what other subjects will they discuss? Those topics are followed by reports on a mission to Saturn, the health benefits of reading, and a space station zipline. TRANSCRIPT Click here to access the printable version of today's CNN 10 transcript. CNN 10 serves a growing audience interested in compact on-demand news broadcasts ideal for explanation seekers on the go or in the classroom. The show's priority is to identify stories of international significance and then clearly describe why they're making news, who is affected, and how the events fit into a complex, international society. Thank you for using CNN 10  
1491430133	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/05/middleeast/syrian-man-loses-family-in-attack/index.html	'My entire family's gone': Syrian man says 25 relatives died in strike - CNN.com	This story contains graphic imagery. (CNN)Abdul Hamid Youssef says the attack shook him from a deep sleep. He awoke, finding it difficult to breathe. Leaping from bed, Youssef scrambled to make sure his 9-month-old twins were still alive. Apparently unharmed, he passed them to his wife and told her to stay in the house. Rushing outside to check on his parents next door, Youssef passed people staggering and falling in the street. Youssef and many members of his extended family live on the northern edge of Khan Sheikhoun, a town in Syria's Idlib province. On Tuesday, airstrikes battered an area near their local bakery, meters from Youssef's home. But it wasn't just any attack -- Syrian President Bashar al-Assad has been accused of using chemical weapons in the strikes that rattled the rebel-held area while many were still sleeping. Youssef arrived in his parents' house to find his two brothers dead. Panicked, he rushed back to his home to check on his wife and babies. "There was foam on their mouths, there were convulsions. They had all been on the floor," Youssef told CNN on Wednesday, sobbing. "My kids, Ahmad and Aya, and my wife... they were all martyred. "My entire family's gone." Youssef's wife and children were among the victims of what is feared to be the deadliest chemical attack in years in the country. Investigations are underway to determine who was responsible for the Tuesday morning attack that left at least 70 dead, according to activists. Syria's military has denied using chemical weapons and blamed rebels for the carnage. Read more: From airstrike to aftermath, how a chemical attack in Syria unfolded Youssef says he collapsed and awoke a few hours later in a hospital bed to a shocking reality -- much of his extended family was dead. He says about 25 of his relatives died that day in Khan Sheikhoun. "My brothers, their children, and their cousins," Youssef says. "Around 25 members of my family, all martyred." According to local reports on Tuesday, at least 19 members of the Youssef family were killed in the strike. His wife and twins were noted on the list of victims, which was circulated online. On Wednesday, people in the northern Syrian town gathered to bury the dead. A picture of Youssef cradling his children, both wrapped in white sheets, went viral on social media. Youssef was photographed sitting at the edge of a burial site, holding his twins. Footage, filmed later, shows him kneeling by their graves and weeping. "I am crying, but these are tears of joy," Youssef says, explaining that his children are now with God, and that is better than being in Syria. "My kids aren't the first kids to die," he adds, breaking down in tears.  
1491430093	http://www.cnn.com/2013/07/04/us/donald-trump-fast-facts/index.html	Donald Trump Fast Facts - CNN.com	(CNN)Here's a look at the life of Donald Trump, the 45th President of the United States. Personal: Birth date: June 14, 1946 Birth place: New York, New York Birth name: Donald John Trump Father: Fred Trump, real estate developer Mother: Mary (Macleod) Trump Marriages: Melania (Knauss) Trump (January 22, 2005-present); Marla (Maples) Trump (December 1993-June 1999, divorced); Ivana (Zelnicek) Trump (1977-1990, divorced) Children: with Melania (Knauss) Trump: Barron, March 20, 2006; with Marla Maples: Tiffany, October 13, 1993; with Ivana (Zelnicek) Trump: Eric, 1984; Ivanka, October 30, 1981; Donald Jr., December 31, 1977 Education: Attended Fordham University; University of Pennsylvania, Wharton School of Finance, BS in Economics,1968 Other Facts: As Trump evolved from real estate developer to reality television star, he turned his name into a brand. Licensed Trump products have included board games, steaks, cologne, vodka, furniture and menswear. He has portrayed himself in cameo appearances in movies and on television, including "Zoolander," "Sex and the City" and "Home Alone 2: Lost in New York." Trump's slogan, "Make America Great Again," was first used by Ronald Reagan while he was running against President Jimmy Carter. Timeline: 1970s - After college, works with his father on apartment complexes in Queens and Brooklyn. 1973 - Fred and Donald Trump are named in a Justice Department lawsuit alleging Trump property managers violated the Fair Housing Act by turning away potential African-American tenants. The Trumps deny the company discriminates and file a $100 million countersuit, which is later dismissed. The case is settled in 1975, and the Trumps agree to provide weekly lists of vacancies to black community organizations. 1976 - Trump and his father partner with the Hyatt Corporation, purchasing the Commodore Hotel, an aging midtown Manhattan property. The building is revamped and opens four years later as the Grand Hyatt Hotel. The project kickstarts Trump's career as a Manhattan developer. 1983-1990 - Builds/purchases multiple properties in New York City, including Trump Tower and the Plaza Hotel. Also opens casinos in Atlantic City, New Jersey, including the Trump Taj Mahal and the Trump Plaza. Also buys the New Jersey Generals football team, part of the United States Football League, which folds after three seasons. 1985 - Purchases Mar-a-Lago, an oceanfront estate in Palm Beach, Florida. It is renovated and opens as a private club in 1995. 1987 - Trump's first book, "Trump: The Art of the Deal," is published and becomes a bestseller. The Donald J. Trump Foundation is established in order to donate a portion of profits from book sales to charities. 1990 - Nearly $1 billion in personal debt, Trump reaches an agreement with bankers allowing him to avoid declaring bankruptcy. 1991 - The Trump Taj Mahal files for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection. 1992 - The Trump Plaza and the Trump Castle casinos file for bankruptcy. 1996 - Buys out and becomes executive producer of the Miss Universe, Miss USA and Miss Teen USA pageants. October 7, 1999 - Tells CNN's Larry King that he is going to form a presidential exploratory committee and wants to challenge Pat Buchanan for the Reform Party nomination. February 14, 2000 - Says that he is abandoning his bid for the presidency, blaming discord within the Reform Party. January 2004 - "The Apprentice," a reality show featuring aspiring entrepreneurs competing for Trump's approval, premieres on NBC. November 21, 2004 - Trump Hotels & Casino Resorts Inc. files for Chapter 11 bankruptcy. 2005 - Establishes Trump University, which offers seminars in real estate investment. February 13, 2009 - Announces his resignation from his position as chairman of Trump Entertainment Resorts. Days later, the company files for bankruptcy protection. March 17, 2011 - During an interview on ABC's "Good Morning America," Trump questions whether President Barack Obama was actually born in the United States. June 16, 2015 - Announces that he is running for president during a speech at Trump Tower. June 28, 2015 - Says he's giving up the TV show "The Apprentice" to run for president. June 29, 2015 - NBC says it is cutting its business ties to Trump and won't air the Miss USA and Miss Universe pageants because of "derogatory statements by Donald Trump regarding immigrants." This comes two weeks after comments Trump made about Mexican immigrants during his presidential campaign announcement. July 8, 2015 - In an interview with CNN's Anderson Cooper, Trump says he "can't guarantee" all of the workers he employs have legal status in the United States. This is in response to questions about a Washington Post report about undocumented immigrants working at the Old Post Office Pavilion construction site in Washington, which Trump is converting into a luxury hotel. July 15, 2015 - Trump's campaign reports the Republican presidential candidate's net worth is "in excess of ten billion dollars," and his personal finance disclosure has been submitted to the Federal Election Commission. July 22, 2015 - Donald Trump's financial disclosure report is made public by the Federal Election Commission. August 6, 2015 - During the first 2016 Republican debate, Trump is questioned about a third party candidacy, his attitude towards women and his history of donating money to Democratic politicians. He tells moderator Megyn Kelly of Fox News he feels he is being mistreated. August 7, 2015 - The controversy continues, as Trump tells CNN's Don Lemon that Kelly was singling him out for attack, "You could see there was blood coming out of her eyes, blood coming out of her wherever." September 11, 2015 - Trump announces on social media he has purchased NBC's half of the Miss Universe Organization, which organizes the annual Miss USA and Miss Universe pageants. December 7, 2015 - Trump's campaign puts out a press release calling for a "complete shutdown of Muslims entering the United States until our country's representatives can figure out what is going on." March 29, 2016 - Trump's campaign manager Corey Lewandowski is arrested and charged in Jupiter, Florida, with simple battery of former Breitbart reporter Michelle Fields. Two weeks later, State Attorney David Aronberg announces he will not prosecute Lewandowski. May 26, 2016 - Secures enough delegates to clinch the Republican Party nomination. July 16, 2016 - Formally introduces Indiana Governor Mike Pence as his running mate. July 19, 2016 - Becomes the Republican Party nominee for president. September 13, 2016 - During an interview with CNN's Jake Tapper, New York Attorney General Eric Schneiderman says his office is investigating Donald Trump's charitable foundation "to make sure it's complying with the laws governing charities in New York." October 1, 2016 - The New York Times reports Trump declared a $916 million loss in 1995 which could have allowed him to legally skip paying federal income taxes for years. The report is based on a financial document mailed to the newspaper by an anonymous source. October 7, 2016 - Unaired footage from 2005 surfaces of Trump talking about trying to have sex with a married woman and being able to grope women. In footage obtained by The Washington Post, Trump is heard off-camera discussing women in vulgar terms during the taping of a segment for "Access Hollywood." In a taped response, Trump apologizes early Saturday, "I said it, I was wrong and I apologize." October 9, 2016 - During the second presidential debate, CNN's Anderson Cooper asks Trump about his descriptions of groping and kissing women without their consent in the "Access Hollywood" footage. Trump denies that he has ever engaged in such behavior and declares the comments were "locker room talk." After the debate, 11 women step forward to claim that they were sexually harassed or sexually assaulted by the real estate developer. Trump says the stories aren't true. November 8, 2016 - Is elected president of the United States. Trump will be the first US president who has never held elected office, a top government post or a military rank. November 18, 2016 - Trump agrees to pay $25 million to settle three lawsuits against Trump University. The deal will keep the president-elect from having to testify in a trial in San Diego that was set to begin November 28. The settlement ends a suit brought by New York Attorney General Eric Schneiderman, as well as two class action suits in California. About 6,000 former students are covered by the settlement. The victims will receive at least half of their money back. December 24, 2016 - Trump says he will dissolve the Donald J. Trump Foundation "to avoid even the appearance of any conflict with my role as President." A spokeswoman for the New York Attorney General's Office says that the foundation cannot legally close until investigators conclude their probe of the charity. January 20, 2017 - Takes the oath of office from Chief Justice John Roberts during an inauguration ceremony at the Capitol, then delivers an inaugural address which focuses on the populist themes that fueled his outsider run for the presidency. January 27, 2017 - Trump signs an executive order halting all refugee arrivals for 120 days and banning travel to the United States from seven Muslim-majority countries for 90 days. Additionally, refugees from Syria are barred indefinitely from entering the US. The order is challenged in court. February 3, 2017 - A federal judge in Washington state blocks the ban nationwide. February 9, 2017 - A panel of three judges in the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals rules against the Trump administration, which sought to lift the block on the executive order. February 28, 2017 - Trump nominates Neil Gorsuch to replace late Supreme Court Justice Antonin Scalia. March 4, 2017 - Alleges on Twitter, without offering evidence, that his predecessor, Barack Obama, wiretapped his phones at Trump Tower ahead of the 2016 election. "Terrible! Just found out that Obama had my 'wires tapped' in Trump Tower just before the victory. Nothing found. This is McCarthyism!" March 6, 2017 - Trump signs a new version of the executive order banning immigration from six Muslim-majority countries. Iraq is no longer on the list of banned countries and the provision blocking Syrian refugees indefinitely is removed. One day after the order is signed, Hawaii files a federal lawsuit challenging the ban. March 15, 2017 - A federal judge in Hawaii issues a restraining order which blocks the new travel ban and the suspension of the refugee program nationwide hours before it is scheduled to take effect. Calling it "fundamentally flawed," US District Court Judge Derrick Watson writes, "It is undisputed, using the primary source upon which the Government itself relies, that these six countries have overwhelmingly Muslim populations that range from 90.7% to 99.8%...It would therefore be no paradigmatic leap to conclude that targeting these countries likewise targets Islam." Two days after the ruling is issued, the Justice Department files a motion to narrow the scope of the Hawaii's temporary restraining order, allowing the government to suspend the refugee program while other components of the ban are litigated. March 16, 2017 - A federal judge in Maryland issues a similar ruling. US District Judge Theodore D. Chuang blocks the travel ban, saying that it is unconstitutional. Also on March 16, the Trump administration releases its budget blueprint, with increases in funding for the military and cuts for agencies including the State Department, the Environmental Protection Agency and the Department of Agriculture. April 3, 2017 - The White House announces that President Trump is donating his salary from his first months in office to the National Park Service. Spokesman Sean Spicer displays a check for $78,333.32 during a press briefing with Secretary of the Interior, Ryan Zinke.  
1491430075	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/05/politics/white-house-reach-out-democrats/index.html	White House meets with Democrats ahead of tax, infrastructure fights - CNNPolitics.com	Washington (CNN)The White House has signaled to Democrats that it is willing to make good on its promise to work across the aisle on issues like tax reform and infrastructure, something the President has said publicly after Republicans' high-profile failure to repeal and replace Obamacare. The Trump administration's director of legislative affairs, Marc Short, met with the moderate Blue Dog Democrats on Monday evening on Capitol Hill, according to two people familiar with the meeting. There were about 15 Democratic members present and a number of Congressional staffers, one source said. The Blue Dog Democrats Coalition for the 115th Congress has 18 members, so a majority of that group attended the meeting -- though the sources declined to give specific names of Congress members who attended. RELATED: How Republicans are working to revive the health care bill It is a strategic move for the Trump administration as they struggle to find votes to support their legislative agenda. These would be the clearest allies on the Democratic caucus the Trump team can find: Centrist, bordering on almost right-leaning Democrats, hailing mostly from Trump districts. One source said both sides discussed infrastructure in an effort to try and lock in some early goodwill from a group that will be central to any big push on that front. That person also added the meeting included some discussion on tax reform, in an effort to feel out where the Democrats stand on the issue. Short pledged would meet with the group at a regular clip in the weeks ahead, according to one of the sources. RELATED: Ellison: Democrats 'stand ready' to work with Republicans  
1491429963	http://www.cnn.com/2013/11/07/world/papal-timeline-fast-facts/index.html	Papal Timeline Fast Facts - CNN.com	(CNN)Here's some background information about the Vatican's time table and process for choosing a new pope. Approximate Time Table: (This timeline is based on 1996 Pope John Paul II's constitution on the conclave, "Universi Dominici Gregis," and on what by has happened in previous conclaves.) Burial & Mourning upon Death of a Pope: Cardinals decide, after the death of the pope, when funerals and conclave begin. Universi Dominici Gregis (hereafter referred to as Law) dictates that: - There must be nine days of mourning. - The conclave cannot begin earlier than 15 days and no later than 20 days after the pope's death. - The pope has to be buried between the fourth and sixth day after death. - The embalmed body of the pope has to be on display at St. Peter's Basilica for mourning. Choosing a New Pope: Based on the above and what traditionally happens after the pope dies, we can assume the following time table: DAY ONE By tradition and law, Vatican Radio announces the pope's death: Sedes vacantes. (Sedes Vacantes: The seat of the Holy See is empty and it is referred to the death of the pope.) The Interregnum begins. Cardinals start gathering in Rome. (Interregnum: The period between the death of pope and the election of a new pope.) DAY TWO By tradition, the body of the pope is dressed in papal vestments and will be put on display at St. Peter's Basilica. Pilgrims will flock St. Peter's. Mourning begins and by law must continue for 9 days (Novemdiales), ending on the 10th day after death. There will be a Mass on each day. (Novendiales: nine days of mourning.) DAY FOUR, FIVE or SIX By law, a burial takes place. Tradition calls for popes to be buried in St. Peter's Basilica. DAY TEN By tradition, big funeral Mass takes place at St. Peter's. DAY FIFTEEN (earliest possible date) By law, conclave begins in the Sistine Chapel. On that morning, the cardinals will concelebrate the Votive Mass "Pro Eligendo Papa." The cardinals will determine where to hold the Mass; most likely it will be in St. Peter's Basilica. In the afternoon they will start the conclave. In theory they can vote that afternoon. The Voting: The cardinals will vote twice in the morning and twice in the afternoon. At the end of each voting session, they will burn the ballots and send a signal to the world by the color of the smoke: BLACK FOR NO POPE AND WHITE FOR POPE. For the first time, pealing bells from St. Peter's will accompany the white smoke, so that there is no confusion. Voting can go on for days. READ: Selecting a pope After the New Pope Is Elected: He will come out St. Peter's Basilica main balcony. A cardinal will say the words "Habemus Papa" and will announce the new pope's name. By tradition, anywhere between 30 minutes to one hour can pass between the white smoke and the appearance on the balcony. It is only when the cardinal announces the name that we'll know who he is. Inauguration of the new pope will likely take place days after his election. He decides where and when to hold the Mass, although it probably will be at St. Peter's.  
1491429891	http://www.cnn.com/2013/09/30/us/titanic-fast-facts/index.html	Titanic Fast Facts - CNN.com	(CNN)Here's a look at the "unsinkable" RMS Titanic. April 10, 1912 - The Titanic sets sail on its maiden voyage from Southampton, England, to New York. April 14-15, 1912 - The luxury liner hits an iceberg in the North Atlantic around midnight and sinks in less than three hours. Approximately 1,500 people died and nearly 700 survived out of about 2,220 passengers and crew. The Ship: The estimated cost of construction was $7.5 million (over $400 million today). At the time, the RMS Titanic was the largest passenger ship afloat. The ship's length was 882 feet, 9 inches, and it weighed 46,328 tons. Its top speed was 23 knots. The wreckage is located about 350 miles off the southeast coast of Newfoundland. What was the cause? In April 1912, there were about 300 icebergs in the North Atlantic shipping lanes, the most seen in the route between Europe and North America in 50 years. The abundance of icebergs that year would also be something the Titanic's experienced captain, Edward Smith, would not have predicted. He'd been sailing the North Atlantic for 26 years and had not reduced the Titanic's speed despite receiving warnings of bergs ahead of his ship. The iceberg punctured five of 16 supposedly watertight compartments designed to hold water in case of a breach to the hull. Investigations at the time blamed Captain Edward Smith for going too fast in dangerous waters, initial inspections that had been done too quickly, insufficient room in the lifeboats for all passengers, and a nearby ship's failure to help, according to Britannica.com. Many maritime safety reforms were implemented as a result of the findings of the investigations. Victims and Survivors: There were 324 1st class passengers aboard. 201 survived. There were 277 2nd class passengers aboard. 118 survived. There were 708 3rd class passengers aboard. 181 survived. There were 885 crew members aboard. 212 survived. There were 13 postmen and musicians on board. None of them survived. Captain Smith went down with the ship, and his body was never recovered. Frederick Fleet, one of the crew members who first alerted Captain Smith to the iceberg, was rescued and survived. Notable Passengers: Survived - - The "Unsinkable" Margaret (Molly) Brown - wife of a silver mine manager, helped command a lifeboat and nursed injured survivors of the Titanic. - J. Bruce Ismay, managing director of the International Mercantile Marine and one of the Titanic's owners. - Henry S. Harper, of the firm Harper & Bros. Died - - Colonel John Jacob Astor, member of the Astor family. - Isidor Straus, merchant and banker, co-owner of Macy's. - Benjamin Guggenheim, member of the Guggenheim family. - George D. Widener, son of P.A.B. Widener, Philadelphia businessman. - Washington Roebling, whose uncle was a builder of the Brooklyn Bridge. - Charles Melville Hays, general manager of the Grand Trunk Railway. - William Thomas Stead, famous journalist and publicist. - Jacques Futrelle, journalist. - Henry Birkhardt Harris, theatrical manager. - Major Archibald Butt, military aide to President Taft and President Roosevelt. - Francis Davis Millet, American painter. Timeline: (local time, based on the location of the ship.) March 31, 1909 - Construction begins, as a design collaboration between William Pirrie's firm Harland and Wolff and J. Bruce Ismay's White Star Line, in Belfast, Ireland, and takes three years to complete. April 10, 1912, 12 p.m. - The RMS Titanic sets sail from Southampton, England, on its maiden voyage, with approximately 2,220 passengers and crew. April 10, 1912, 6:30 p.m. - Arrival in Cherbourg, France. April 10, 1912, 8:10 p.m. - Leaves Cherbourg. April 11, 1912, 11:30 a.m. - Arrival in Queenstown, Ireland. April 11, 1912, 1:30 p.m. - Leaves Queenstown, raising anchor for the last time. April 14, 1912, 11:40 p.m. - The Titanic hits an iceberg. April 15, 1912, 12:40 a.m. - Captain Edward Smith gives the order to uncover the lifeboats and evacuate women and children. April 15, 1912, 12:20 a.m. - The RMS Carpathia receives distress calls and heads to the site to help. It arrives at 3:30 a.m. April 15, 1912, 12:45 a.m. - The first lifeboat is launched with 28 people on board out of a capacity of 65. April 15, 1912, 2:20 a.m. - The Titanic sinks in less than three hours. April 15, 1912, 8:50 a.m. - The Carpathia leaves for New York with 705 Titanic survivors onboard. It arrives April 18. April and May 1912 - Separate American and British investigations and official inquiries take place. September 1, 1985 - Scientists from Woods Hole Deep Submergence LAB (DSL) in Massachusetts, led by Dr. Robert Ballard, and IFREMER, the French Institute Francais de Recherche pour l'Exploitation des Mers, led by Jean Jarry locate the wreckage of Titanic. July 13, 1986 - Dr. Robert Ballard and his crew use the manned deep-ocean research submersible Alvin (DSV-2) to explore the wreckage. The Alvin is accompanied by a remotely operated vehicle (ROV) named Jason Jr. to conduct photographic surveys and further inspections. 2004 - Guernsey's auctions off memorabilia and a few artifacts that had been passed down through the families of survivors from the ship, including an original menu that goes for about $100,000. May 31, 2009 - The last known survivor, Millvina Dean, dies at age 97. March 31, 2012 - The world's largest Titanic attraction opens in Belfast, Northern Ireland, where the ship was built. April 8-20, 2012 - The 100th anniversary of Titanic's only voyage. The MS Balmoral traces the ship's route from Southampton to New York and holds a memorial service on April 15 above the wreck. March 2015 - A letter said to have been written by a mother and daughter once aboard the Titanic is displayed at the Titanic's Belfast center in Ireland. The letter was purchased at auction by a couple who then loaned the letter to be displayed at the world's largest Titanic exhibition for the next five years. September 30, 2015 - The last known first-class lunch menu from the Titanic is sold at auction to a private collector for $88,000. Also auctioned: a printed ticket from a weighing chair located in the ship's Turkish baths, which sold for $11,000, and a letter to the man who was alleged to have paid off the lifeboat's crew, which sold for $7,500.  
1491430879	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/05/opinions/steve-bannon-white-house-national-security-bergen/index.html	With Bannon out, White House gets serious about national security - CNN.com	Peter Bergen is CNN's national security analyst, a vice president at New America and a professor of practice at Arizona State University. He is the author of "United States of Jihad: Investigating America's Homegrown Terrorists." (CNN)The news that President Trump's chief strategist Stephen Bannon no longer has a permanent seat on the "principals committee" of the National Security Council comes at a particularly opportune time. The NSC is increasingly becoming the locus of the key decision-making about the United States' place in the world, in part because the State Department under the Trump administration is barely functioning, while almost all of the key policymaking positions at the Defense Department remain unfilled. Bannon should never have had a permanent seat on the NSC as he is a political operative and the NSC has traditionally been a place where American interests are considered rather than narrow Republican or Democratic interests. In late January, White House spokesman Sean Spicer tried to justify Bannon's seat on the NSC because he had once served in the US Navy, but Bannon left the Navy as a lieutenant in the early 1980s. The military and the world have changed quite a bit since Olivia Newton-John's "Physical" was a No. 1 song and Ronald Reagan had recently become president. Another NSC official who may be sidelined is deputy national security adviser K.T. McFarland. McFarland is a longtime Fox News talking head who had been out of government since she was a speechwriter in the Reagan administration and who has scant relevant expertise or experience for her present role. McFarland has been offered the soft landing of US ambassador to Singapore, although it's not clear if she will take that job or some other role at the State Department or simply remain in place. The key role of the NSC in making national security policy and foreign policy was a pronounced feature of the Obama administration and it seems this will also be the case for the Trump administration. Trump's national security adviser Lt. Gen. H.R. McMaster inherited an NSC team from his predecessor Michael Flynn that is quite formidable in three areas that are key to American national security interests: China (and by extension North Korea), the Middle East and Russia. This is fortuitous because the United States faces gathering foreign policy crises. In Syria the Russian-backed Basher al-Assad regime is credibly charged with using sarin gas against its own civilians, while the mercurial North Korean leader Kim Jong Un continues his saber rattling. The top NSC official on Asia is Matthew Pottinger, who spent many years in China working as a Mandarin-speaking reporter for the Wall Street Journal. After leaving the Journal, Pottinger then joined the Marines and served as a captain in Afghanistan and is now a lieutenant colonel in the Marine Corps Reserves. Pottinger has been deeply involved in the planning for Chinese President Xi Jinping's visit with President Trump that begins on Thursday. What to do about North Korea will be one of the top agenda items for their meetings. When it comes to the greater Middle East, McMaster brings to the table his own deep knowledge of Iraq and Afghanistan, countries where he served for many years. Serving under McMaster is a triumvirate of well-seasoned Middle East hands. The senior director at the NSC for the Middle East is retired Col. Derek Harvey, an Arabic-speaking intelligence officer with a Ph.D. who served as the head of the US military cell examining the insurgency in Iraq in 2003. It was Harvey who first laid out for President George W. Bush at the White House in the winter of 2004 the real scale and nature of the Sunni insurgency at a time when the Bush administration wouldn't use the word "insurgency," because it implied they were facing something much more serious than the "dead enders" Vice President Dick Cheney was then publicly talking about. The NSC director for Iraq, Iran, Lebanon and Syria is Col. Joel Rayburn who served in Iraq as an adviser to Gen. David Petraeus. An intelligence officer and historian, Rayburn published a 2014 book, "Iraq After America," which is a must-read for anyone who wants to understand how Iraq descended into chaos in the years after the American troop withdrawal at the end of 2011. Finally, there is Michael Bell, another retired colonel with a Ph.D. who also served under Petraeus as the leader of his Initiatives Group, which acted as Petraeus' internal think tank when he was the commanding general in Iraq. Bell is now the director at the NSC for the Gulf States and Yemen. Meanwhile, the top official on Russia at the NSC is a frequent critic of Russian President Vladimir Putin: Fiona Hill, who joined the Trump administration last month. Hill previously worked as a US intelligence officer focused on Russia under both presidents George W. Bush and Barack Obama. Since McMaster has assumed the role of national security adviser, he has beefed up the NSC in other areas. McMaster now has a new top deputy for strategy, Egyptian-born Dina Powell, who served in the George W. Bush administration, speaks Arabic and also worked at Goldman Sachs. Powell is widely respected and is close to Ivanka Trump. McMaster also brought on defense expert Nadia Schadlow to the NSC to write the Trump administration's national security strategy. Schadlow just published a book, "War and the Art of Governance," which examines how to turn "combat success into political victory," an enormously relevant question right now as ISIS begins to crumble and the Trump administration looks to what the "day after" ISIS looks like in Iraq and eventually Syria. The visit to Iraq by Trump's son-in-law Jared Kushner on Monday received a lot of attention, but what went unremarked was the presence of the American official pictured next to him in the group photo that was released of the US delegation that met with Iraqi Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi. The man on Kushner's right was Tom Bossert, who served on George W. Bush's NSC and is an expert in cybersecurity. Bossert is now Trump's homeland security and counterterrorism adviser. Bossert has kept a low profile and is not a regular on cable TV, but he is well regarded by his peers in the national security field. (Full disclosure: I know to a greater or lesser degree a number of the officials mentioned in this article, including McMaster, Rayburn, Harvey, Bell, Pottinger, Schadlow and Bossert.) The significance of having an NSC staffed with officials with real expertise and experience cannot be underestimated at a time when both the State Department and the Defense Department are only thinly staffed in their top echelons. Secretary of Defense James Mattis, for instance, is the only senior Pentagon official to be confirmed at the Pentagon.  
1491430803	http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/05/opinions/when-a-cops-fear-means-a-death-sentence-bailey/index.html	When a cop's fear means a death sentence (opinion) - CNN.com	Issac Bailey has been a journalist in South Carolina for two decades and was most recently the primary columnist for The Sun News in Myrtle Beach. He was a 2014 Harvard University Nieman fellow. Follow him on Twitter: @ijbailey. The views expressed are his own. (CNN)When Tulsa Police Officer Betty Shelby said that she'd rather be judged by 12 than carried by six, she was simply being rational -- because she knows her badge and uniform make her nearly immune to conviction if she is charged with committing a crime, like manslaughter, while on duty. Another message is clear in her statement: that a police officer's fear, real or imagined, should always be prioritized. That's the takeaway from Shelby's "60 Minutes" interview Sunday night, only weeks before she faces trial for first-degree manslaughter after being caught on video shooting Terence Crutcher. Shelby likely knows that police officers are rarely charged for killing someone while in the line of duty, and it is rarer still for a jury to find them guilty. That she is facing trial at all, according to her husband, is evidence of a growing "war on police." Never mind that his wife killed an unarmed man whom another officer had declared looked like "a bad dude." In other words, the system is being unfair to the person who walked away from the encounter, but worked well for the man whose body has already been "carried by six" to a gravesite of his family's choosing. Crutcher did not comply with Shelby's shouted commands. By some strange reasoning, that made it perfectly reasonable to shoot him on the side of the road, then blame him on national TV for his own death. Forget about Crutcher's walking away. Ignore that he had his hands in the air. It doesn't matter that he made not a single aggressive move, that he was committing no crime. He wasn't a suspect in a series of unsolved rapes or murders or bank robberies. He was an imperfect man with drug residue in his system and a stalled vehicle in the road. He essentially committed suicide by cop, Shelby is convinced, because of what she and other officers said was a split-second move to lower his hands when he neared the window of his SUV. For that, he deserved death. Asked if there was anything that could have prevented that shooting, Shelby said that Crutcher could have simply complied, not that police officers need to be better trained or rethink what they've been taught or show even a split-second more restraint before needlessly taking a life. That's the case in a nutshell. And that's why police officers who speak this way, and the juries who are likely to believe them, keep worsening the divide we face. We are to always empathize with the police officer, never the dead man. It doesn't matter that police officers are trained in a variety of ways and paid to handle stressful situations, and also matters little that they chose to put on the uniform to take on those responsibilities. Simply put, if they are afraid, they get to shoot you dead. Why didn't Crutcher comply? Maybe the stress of seeing a police officer made him fear for his life, particularly an officer who had pulled out her gun and kept it pointed at him the entire time as he slowly walked back to his SUV with both hands high in the air. Why isn't Crutcher's response considered rational -- to be so afraid of the police that compliance becomes nearly impossible, that "false moves" are inevitable -- given that we've seen police officers shoot men in the back while they are running away and are still not convicted? Maybe he was having a manic moment. Maybe he was complying the way he was taught, to immediately get into a position of surrender, and was walking back to his SUV to retrieve not a weapon, but ID, or proof that he owned the vehicle. It appears not to matter to Shelby that Crutcher had no gun or knife or baseball bat. It matters only that there was the slightest possibility that he could have. She is arguing for a kind of shoot-first-ask-questions-later immunity. Should that also apply to the scared woman involved in a road rage incident? To the gang member who accidentally crosses over into the wrong territory and (wrongly) imagines the 15-year-old boy at the park was reaching for a gun when he was just pulling a baseball from his bag? Should the startled homeowner be allowed to instantly shoot the strange man who knocks on his front door at night to protect his family from a perceived potential harm? Or should the shoot-first-ask-questions-later immunity apply only to police officers like Shelby? Police officers are heroic and run towards danger. That's what we are told. They put themselves in harm's way for our protection. But when they display something different from courage, instead giving into their fear, we are supposed to protect them from the consequences of their actions. That's the message being sent by Shelby and those who defend her. No one should be surprised when a jury of her peers honors that contradiction and simultaneously sends two messages: to cops that no matter what they do, they will be protected, and to men like Crutcher that at any moment, a cop's fear can sentence them to a death that will almost always be deemed justified.  
1491430790	http://money.cnn.com/2017/04/04/media/list-oreilly-factor-advertisers-responses/index.html	Read what Bill O'Reilly's sponsors are saying about 'disturbing allegations' of harassment - Apr. 4, 2017	O'Reilly accuser: I'm not after money Fox News' "The O'Reilly Factor" is facing a rapidly growing exodus of advertisers in the wake of a New York Times report that five different women had reached settlements over allegations of sexual harassment or verbal abuse against the show's host, Bill O'Reilly. CNNMoney has reached out to dozens of the companies that have run ads on the program. Below is a list of the responses we've received so far, as well as some responses that companies have put on their Twitter accounts after users of that site asked them about their ads. Companies pulling their ads from "The O'Reilly Factor" Mercedes-Benz: "Yes, we had advertising running on The O'Reilly Factor (we run on most major cable news shows) and it has been reassigned in the midst of this controversy. The allegations are disturbing and, given the importance of women in every aspect of our business, we don't feel this is a good environment in which to advertise our products right now." Hyundai: "Hyundai currently has no advertising on The O'Reilly Factor. We had upcoming advertising spots on the show but are reallocating them due to the recent and disturbing allegations. As a company we seek to partner with companies and programming that share our values of inclusion and diversity. We will continue to monitor and evaluate the situation as we plan future advertising decisions." BMW of North America: "In light of the recent New York Times investigation, BMW of North America has suspended its advertising with 'The O'Reilly Factor.'" Mitsubishi: "Mitsubishi Motors takes these allegations very seriously and we have decided that we will pull our advertising at the present time. We will continue to monitor this situation as we assess our long-term strategy." Lexus: "We take our duties as a responsible advertiser seriously and have been closely monitoring the situation involving 'The O'Reilly Factor.' In response, we have asked our media-buying partners to move all Lexus ad inventory out of the program." Ainsworth Pet Nutrition: "We removed our advertising from the program because of these recent and disturbing allegations." Constant Contact: "Based on the recent allegations and our strong commitment to inclusion, respect and tolerance in the workplace, we have decided to pull Constant Contact's ads from The O'Reilly Factor." Credit Karma: "In light of the recent concerning allegations, we will not be advertising on this show and have asked for our ads to be removed." Bayer: "Bayer supports a safe, respectful and non-abusive environment for women and we have reached out to Fox to voice our concerns regarding this matter. Based on the serious nature of these allegations, we have made the decision to suspend all advertising on the program in question. This suspension has been requested immediately and will be handled as expeditiously as possible. We have been informed, however, that programming changes may not become effective immediately. It is important to note that Bayer purchases packages of advertising time across all major networks without selecting placement on any specific program. We regularly evaluate our advertising purchases to make sound judgments to continue or discontinue based upon our beliefs, values and ethical considerations." TrueCar: "Pending further assessment of recent developments, we have instructed our media buyer to direct our advertising to other programming." GlaxoSmithKline: "We are continually reviewing our advertising to ensure it is conducted in a responsible manner aligned with our values. We have temporarily put a hold on spots running on The O'Reilly Factor while we assess this situation." Sanofi: "At Sanofi Consumer Healthcare, decisions about advertising on any given website, network, magazine, or programs are never undertaken as an endorsement or non-endorsement of the host, editorial or entertainment content. Rather, our purpose in advertising our product is to provide important information to consumers so that they may make an informed decision about which product will best provide relief for their symptoms. The controversy around The O'Reilly Factor program and allegations made against Bill O'Reilly are matters that we take seriously and will continue to monitor. We do not endorse the behavior or opinions of program hosts or the content. We have reallocated our current advertising originally scheduled during this program. We will continue to monitor and evaluate the situation as we plan future advertising decisions." UNTUCKit: "As a company in which more than 2/3rd of our employees are women, we take sexual harassment claims very seriously. Moreover, it is important our corporate partners reflect the same principles of inclusivity and equality upon which we have built our brand. In light of the disturbing allegations, we instructed our media buyer this morning to reallocate our ad dollars to other shows effective immediately. We will continue to closely monitor the situation but believe this is the right decision at this time." Allstate: "Inclusivity and support for women are important Allstate values. We are concerned about the issues surrounding the program and we have suspended our advertising." Esurance: "In light of the recent controversies surrounding Bill O'Reilly and his treatment of women, Esurance is suspending its advertising during "The O'Reilly Factor." At Esurance, inclusion and support for women extends across all aspects of our business — from our associates to our customers to our partners. And we want to partner with organizations and programming that share those same values." T. Rowe Price: "We regularly evaluate our media buys to ensure alignment with our corporate values, and in light of the recent allegations we have decided to pull our upcoming ads from The O'Reilly Factor." Wayfair: "We do not have any future ad buys planned for the show at this time. We condemn all forms of harassment and are closely assessing the situation. We have advertised on the show in the past and in light of the reports have moved our spots to other programming while we assess the situation." Orkin: "Orkin buys its advertising in broad dayparts on networks that reach our target audience. We do not buy specific shows, including the O'Reilly Factor. The O'Reilly Factor is in the daypart that we buy on Fox, and we have added that show to our "Do Not Buy" list in the wake of the current allegations." Society for Human Resource Management: "SHRM has determined to cease its current advertising on the Fox News Network." The Wonderful Company: "At The Wonderful Company, we are committed to a respectful and inclusive workplace enviornment and insist upon the same from our business partners. We do not currently have or plan for ad inventory on this show." Coldwell Banker: "We were disappointed that our ad ran on O'Reilly as it wasn't part of our intentional media programming. We pulled future ads from the show." H&R Block: "We share your concern about recent allegations, and no longer advertise during The O'Reilly Factor as a result." Weather Tech: "We are already working on adjusting our advertising schedule and we appreciate your feedback." Advil: "We are no longer advertising on the Bill O'Reilly show." BambooHR: "BambooHR condemns workplace harassment, and in light of recent allegations, has canceled ads on The O'Reilly Factor." Jenny Craig: "As an organization, Jenny Craig condemns any and all forms of sexual harassment. As a matter of corporate policy, we do not publicly comment on our advertising strategy. We are constantly evaluating our media buys to maximize the efficiency of our corporate investment and effectively reach our target audience. However, we can confirm that we have suspended all ads on The O'Reilly Factor." Ancestry: "Equality and respect are core values for Ancestry, especially in the workplace. We will not support those whose actions conflict with those values. To be clear, we have pulled our ads from Bill O'Reilly." Subaru: "After review, we will no longer advertise during the Bill O'Reilly show in the future." Old Dominion Freight Line: "In light of the recent allegations surrounding the Bill O'Reilly show, OD has decided to discontinue our commercials from the show." Amica Insurance: "Our ads on The O'Reilly Factor are being pulled. It may take a few days for this to occur." LegalZoom: "This was not part of our intentional media programming and we have pulled all ads from this show." Invisalign: "Align Technology is redirecting its media buy for Invisalign spots and will not advertise on/around The O'Reilly Factor." Pacific Life: "As of today, Pacific Life is no longer an advertiser on the O'Reilly Factor." Visionworks: "Visionworks' media buy was with Fox News, not with any show specifically. Once we learned about the allegations, we pulled our ads from the program. Our media strategy is built around programming that aligns with our company's, and our customer's, core values. We continually review our advertising strategy and update on a quarterly basis, however when situations arise, we are able to work with our media partners to act swiftly to ensure our core values are embodied. After recent allegations on "The O'Reilly Factor," Visionworks has pulled all ads." Stanley Steemer: "We are in the process of removing our commercials from 'The O'Reilly Factor."' Carfax: "For more than 30 years, CARFAX has been working hard as a consumer advocate to give Americans the facts about used cars. The ongoing controversy over The O'Reilly Factor is a distraction from our mission to help millions of consumers. Therefore, we have instructed FOX News to remove our advertising from the program." Eli Lilly and Company: "Eli Lilly and Company has suspended its advertising on The O'Reilly Factor for now." Allstar Products Group: "It was a corporate decision for Allstar Products Group to pull the media." Propane Council: "The Proudly Propane campaign is no longer advertising on The O'Reilly Factor, effective immediately." Reddi Wip: "We've received some questions about our advertising presence on the O'Reilly Factor. We are removing the show from our advertising plans." GoodRx: "After review, GoodRx will no longer advertise on The O'Reilly Factor. We are in the process of removing our ads." Southern New Hampshire University: "In light of recent allegations, SNHU has pulled all advertising from The O'Reilly Factor. As a University, we value diversity, inclusion, and respect for all, and we take every measure to ensure our advertising is consistent with our core values." Touchnote: "We requested that our commercials won't run on the show. Sadly pre-booked spots may still air." BeenVerified: "At this time, we're pulling our advertisements on The O'Reilly Factor. We continually monitor our advertising to make sure it aligns with our company values." Consumer Cellular: "We can confirm that Consumer Cellular has removed our advertising from 'The O'Reilly Factor' show." MileIQ: "We take this very seriously & are addressing it. As the cancellation takes effect, some prebooked spots may still air." Peloton: "Peloton has currently suspended advertising on The O'Reilly Factor in light of the recent allegations against the show's host, which are in direct opposition to our company's core values." Companies currently evaluating whether or not to keep advertising on "The O'Reilly Factor" Trivago: "We are constantly reviewing our media buys to ensure we do not support any behavior that contradicts trivago's corporate values. We are currently reviewing the information available, but do not discuss our advertising strategy publicly." Enterprise Holdings: "We are looking into this, but we haven't made any decisions." TD Ameritrade: "We don't have a direct media buy with the program, and we have only run advertising on the show once in the last quarter. We have no plans to run anything else, at a minimum, until much later in the spring. Harassment in any form is unacceptable, and because one of our core values is People Matter, this is a situation that we are monitoring closely. If we need to make additional changes to our media buying strategy down the road, we have the flexibility to do so." Expedia: "We regularly evaluate all of our media buying, as we are doing now with regard to this program." Companies that will continue to advertise on "The O'Reilly Factor" Angie's List: "The advertising strategy we have long used at Angie's List is meant to reach as many people as possible with news that our service exists and is available to them. We place ads across a wide spectrum of venues intending to reach as many viewers/listeners/ readers as possible without taking a position on the viewpoints of the venues themselves. Just as we trust members to make their own hiring decisions, we trust them to make their own media consumption decisions." Companies that have ceased advertising on "The O'Reilly Factor" for other reasons CFP Board: "CFP Board does not have a partnership or a sponsorship with Fox News. Our television advertising is purchased through an advertising network where the advertisements are placed on multiple cable television channels and shows. As our spring flight is winding down, we will no longer have any placements on Fox News." Companies that aren't saying Quincy Bioscience: "We don't publicly comment on our advertising. As a company we condemn all forms of sexual harassment." CNNMoney (New York) First published April 4, 2017: 1:29 PM ET
